The  Story  of  Fort  Clayton— Its  Setting,  Its  Architecture, 
and  Its  Role  in  the  History  of  the  Panama  Canal 


Susan  I.  Enscore 
Suzanne  P.  Johnson 
Julie  L.  Webster 
Gordon  L.  Cohen 


2001040 


&  -A?- '  : 


DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  A 
Approved  for  Public  Release 
Distribution  Unlimited 


: « 


.  ^ 


;;>^v  • 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATIOM>®3E 


Form  Approved 
OMB  No.  0704-0188 


Public  reporting  burden  for  this  collection  of  information  is  estimated  to  average  t  hour  per  response,  including  the  time  for  reviewing  instructions,  searching  existing  data  sources, 
gathering  and  maintaining  the  data  needed,  and  completing  and  reviewing  the  collection  of  information.  Send  comments  regarding  this  burden  estimate  or  any  other  aspect  of  this 
collection  of  Information,  including  suggestions  for  reducing  this  burden,  to  Washington  Headquarters  Services,  Directorate  for  information  Operations  and  Reports,  1215  Jefferson 
Davis  Highway,  Suite  1204,  Arlington,  VA  22202-4302,  and  to  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget,  Paperwork  Reduction  Project  (0704-0188),  Washington,  DC  20503. 


1.  AGENCY  USE  ONLY  (Leave  Blank)  I  2.  REPORT  DATE 


3.  REPORT  TYPE  AND  DATES  COVERED 


September  2000 


4.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE 


Guarding  the  Gates:  The  Story  of  Fort  Clayton  - 
Role  in  the  History  of  the  Panama  Canal 


-  Its  Setting,  Its  Architecture,  and  Its 


5.  FUNDING  NUMBERS 

Reimbursable  Order  No. 
RH9 


6.  AUTHOR(S) 

Susan  I.  Enscore,  Suzanne  P.  Johnson,  Julie  L.  Webster,  and  Gordon  L.  Cohen 


7.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

U.S.  Army  Engineer  Research  and  Development  Center  (ERDC) 
Construction  Engineering  Research  Laboratory  (CERL) 

P.O.  Box  9005 
Champaign,  IL  61826-9005 


8.  PEFORMING  ORGANIZATION 
REPORT  NUMBER 

ERDC/CERL  Monograph  00-01 


9  SPONSORING  /  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAMEfSt  AND  ADDRESSfES^ 


Weldon  Hill,  Director 
ATTN:  SOFB-PW 
Bldg  556 

Fort  Buchanan,  PR  00934-5000 


9.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 


10.  SPONSORING  /  MONITORING 
AGENCY  REPORT  NUMBER 


Copies  are  available  from  the  National  Technical  Information  Service,  5385  Port  Royal  Road,  Springfield,  VA  22161 


1 2a.  DISTRIBUTION  /  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  is  unlimited. 


13.  ABSTRACT  (Maximum  200  words) 


The  Panama  Canal  Treaty  and  Allied  Agreements  of  1977  between  the  United  States  and  the  Republic  of  Panama  (RoP) 
governed  the  operation,  maintenance,  and  defense  of  the  Panama  Canal  from  their  implementation  until  3 1  December  1999. 

At  noon  on  that  date,  the  Panama  Canal  Treaty  terminated  and  the  RoP  assumed  full  control  and  responsibility  for  the  Panama 
Canal.  The  U.S.  military  presence  in  the  former  Panama  Canal  Zone  ceased  at  that  time  and  all  remaining  Department  of 
Defense  (DoD)  property  in  the  area  reverted  to  the  RoP. 

In  anticipation  of  the  scheduled  transfer  of  this  DoD  property,  efforts  were  made  to  produce  a  lasting  record  of  U.S.  military 
buildings  and  installations  in  Panama.  Fort  Clayton  played  a  long  and  distinguished  role  in  the  defense  of  the  Panama  Canal 
and  related  U.S.  strategic  interests,  as  was  among  the  very  last  properties  to  be  transferred  to  the  RoP.  The  objective  of  this 
project  was  to  trace  the  growth  and  development  of  Fort  Clayton  with  an  emphasis  on  how  the  Army’s  mission  and  doctrine 
shaped  the  post’s  architecture  and  land  use  planning.  This  document  assures  a  permanent  record  of  the  physical  legacy  of  Fort 
Clayton  and  its  significance  in  the  history  of  the  U.S.  military  presence  in  Panama.  It  also  provides  compliance  with  DoD’s 
1992  Overseas  Environmental  Baseline  Guidance  Document  regarding  stewardship  of  DoD  cultural  resources.  In  addition,  the 
document  will  provide  the  RoP  with  valuable  information  for  their  own  determinations  of  historic  significance  now  that  the 
installation  is  Panamanian  property. 


14.  SUBJECT  TERMS 


Ft.  Clayton,  RoP 

cultural  resources  management 


military  bases 
Panama  Canal 


historic  buildings 
military  history 


15.  NUMBER  OF  RAGES 

215 


16.  PRICE  CODE 


17.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 
OF  REPORT 

Unclassified 


18.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 
OF  THIS  PAGE 

Unclassified 


19.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 
OF  ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 


20.  LIMITATION  OF 
ABSTRACT 

SAR 


NSN  7540-01-280-5500 


Standard  Form  298  (Rev.  2-89) 
Prescribed  by  ANSI  Std  239-18 
298-102 


Guarding 
the  Gates 

The  Story  of  Fort  Clayton-Its  Setting,  Its  Architecture, 
and  Its  Role  in  the  History  of  the  Panama  Canal 


Susan  I.  Enscore 
Suzanne  P.  Johnson 
Julie  L.  Webster 
Gordon  L.  Cohen 


ERDC/CERL  Monograph  00-01 
September  2000 


Sponsored  by  the  Prepared  by  the 

Theater  Support  Brigade  Construction  Engineering  Research  Laboratory 

United  States  Army  Southern  Command  U.S.  Army  Engineer  Research  and  Development  Center 


US  Army  Corps 
of  Engineers 

Engineer  Research  and 
Development  Center 


Library  of  Congress  Cataloging-in-Publication  Data 


Guarding  the  gates :  the  story  of  Fort  Clayton— its  setting,  its  architecture,  and  its  role  in 
the  history  of  the  Panama  Canal  /  Susan  I.  Enscore  . . .  [et  al.] . 
p.  cm. 

“September  2000.” 

Includes  bibliographical  references. 

1.  Fort  Clayton  (Canal  Zone)— History.  2.  Military  bases,  American— Panama— Canal 
Zone.  I.  Enscore,  Susan  I. 

UA26.P35  G874  2000 
355.7'097287'5— dc21 

00-067575 


Preface 


Overview 

The  Panama  Canal  Treaty  and  Allied  Agreements  of  1977  between  the  United  States 
and  the  Republic  of  Panama  (RoP)  governed  the  operation,  maintenance,  and 
defense  of  the  Panama  Canal  from  their  implementation  on  1  October  1979  until  31 
December  1999.  At  noon  on  that  date,  the  Panama  Canal  Treaty  terminated  and  the 
RoP  assumed  full  control  and  responsibility  for  the  operation,  maintenance,  and 
defense  of  the  Panama  Canal.  The  U.S.  military  presence  in  the  former  Panama 
Canal  Zone  ceased  at  that  time  and  all  remaining  Department  of  Defense  (DoD) 
property  in  the  area  reverted  to  the  RoP. 

In  anticipation  of  the  scheduled  transfer  of  this  DoD  property,  efforts  have  been 
made  to  produce  a  lasting  record  of  U.S.  military  buildings  and  installations  in 
the  former  Panama  Canal  Zone.  Personnel  from  the  U.S.  Army  Construction  Engi¬ 
neering  Research  Laboratory  (CERL),  working  in  cooperation  with  various  DoD 
services  and  commands  in  Panama,  have  spent  7  years  producing  site-specific 
documentation  related  to  the  developmental  history  of  DoD  installations  in  the 
RoP.  Of  those  installations,  Fort  Clayton  was  among  the  very  last  properties  to  be 
transferred  to  the  RoP.  As  previous  documentation  efforts  focused  on  installa¬ 
tions  being  transferred  more  quickly,  Fort  Clayton’s  physical  legacy  remained 
largely  unrecorded.  With  less  than  a  year  remaining  before  treaty  termination, 
discussions  began  concerning  the  creation  of  a  comprehensive  history  of  Fort 
Clayton  based  upon  its  built  environment.  The  CERL  personnel  and  U.S.  Army 
South  (USARSO)  officials  agreed  on  the  need  for  such  a  history,  and  this  project 
was  born. 

Fort  Clayton  has  played  a  long  and  distinguished  role  in  the  defense  of  the  Panama 
Canal  and  related  U.S.  strategic  interests,  as  its  existence  covered  most  of  the  20th 
century.  The  objective  of  this  project  was  to  trace  the  growth  and  development  of 
Fort  Clayton  with  an  emphasis  on  how  the  Army’s  mission  and  doctrine  shaped  the 
post’s  architecture  and  land  use  planning.  This  book  assures  a  permanent  record  of 
the  physical  legacy  of  Fort  Clayton  and  its  significance  in  the  history  of  the  U.S.  mili¬ 
tary  presence  in  Panama.  It  also  provides  compliance  with  DoD’s  1992  Overseas 
Environmental  Baseline  Guidance  Document  regarding  stewardship  of  DoD  cultural 
resources.  In  addition,  the  document  will  provide  the  RoP  with  valuable  informa¬ 
tion  for  their  own  determinations  of  historic  significance  now  that  the  installation  is 
their  property. 

Sponsorship,  Funding,  and  Administration 

This  study  was  conducted  for  the  Theater  Support  Brigade,  USARSO  under  Military 
Interdepartmental  Purchase  Request  (MIPR)  9K9DEH00039,  dated  23  August  1999. 
The  technical  monitor  was  Mr.  Stuart  G.  R.  Warner,  Command  Historian,  USARSO. 


iii 


The  work  was  conducted  by  the  Land  and  Heritage  Conservation  Branch  (CN-C)  of 
the  Installations  Division,  Construction  Engineering  Research  Laboratory  (CERL), 
Champaign,  Illinois.  The  Principal  Investigator  was  Julie  L.  Webster,  CEERD-CN-C. 
Mr.  Robert  A.  Riggins  is  Chief,  CEERD-CN-C,  and  Dr.  John  T.  Bandy  is  Chief,  CEERD- 
CN.  Dr.  William  D.  Severinghaus  is  Technical  Director  of  the  Military  Land  Manage¬ 
ment  business  area.  The  Acting  Director  of  CERL  is  Mr.  William  D.  Goran. 

CERL  is  an  element  of  the  Engineer  Research  and  Development  Center  (ERDC), 
U.S.  Army  Corps  of  Engineers.  The  Director  of  ERDC  is  Dr.  James  R.  Houston  and 
the  Commander  is  COL  James  S.  Weller. 

Research,  Preparation,  and  Production 

Dr.  Susan  I.  Enscore  and  Ms.  Suzanne  P.  Johnson  conducted  the  research  for  this 
publication  and  prepared  the  manuscript.  Dr.  Enscore  has  served  as  historian  for 
almost  all  Panama-related  cultural  resource  projects  undertaken  by  CERL.  She  has 
spent  countless  hours  researching  archives  both  onsite  in  Panama  and  in  U.S. 
national  historic  document  repositories.  Ms.  Johnson  worked  as  Cultural  Resource 
Manager  (Volunteer)  for  the  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing  (DEH),  U.S. 
Army  Garrison-Panama,  from  1992  to  1995,  and  as  Archives  Specialist  for  the  DEH 
from  1995  to  1996.  Ms.  Julie  L.  Webster,  a  Registered  Architect  in  the  State  of  Illinois, 
has  served  as  the  project  manager  and  principal  architect  for  almost  all  CERL 
Panama-related  cultural  resource  projects.  She  is  also  a  nationally  recognized 
authority  on  historic  military  aviation  hangar  architecture.  Mr.  Gordon  L.  Cohen, 
who  worked  as  the  staff  writer  and  managing  editor  for  this  project,  previously 
worked  as  a  journalist  and  business  writer,  and  has  served  as  the  technical  editor  of 
CERL  reports  related  to  Panama  and  military  architectural  history.  Mr.  Martin 
Stupich  served  as  the  project  photographer,  contributing  many  high-quality  archi¬ 
tectural  portraits  of  Fort  Clayton’s  buildings  and  landscapes  just  prior  to  transfer  of 
the  property  to  the  Republic  of  Panama  in  December  1999.  Ms.  Debra  K.  Krites  was 
the  editorial  assistant  at  CERL  for  this  project;  she  edited  text,  proofread  copy,  and 
processed  several  global  revisions  of  the  manuscript  that  required  extraordinary 
attention  to  detail. 

Art  direction  of  this  project  was  a  joint  effort  of  Ms.  Webster  and  Mr.  Cohen. 

Acknowledgments 

The  Fort  Clayton  documentation  included  in  this  report  was  based  on  both  archival 
and  field  investigations  conducted  in  Panama  as  well  as  repositories  in  the  United 
States.  As  such,  the  authors  are  indebted  to  a  great  many  people  for  their  assistance 
and  support.  First  and  foremost,  we  would  like  to  thank  LTC  Patrick  Staffieri,  former 
Director,  DEH,  U.S.  Army  Garrison-Panama.  He  ably  conveyed  his  enthusiasm  for 
this  project  to  others,  thereby  providing  the  necessary  support  to  make  the  project  a 
reality.  Mr.  Raul  Irigoyen,  former  Deputy  Director,  DEH,  graciously  provided  logisti¬ 
cal  support.  The  “on  the  ground”  experience  of  Mr.  Ivan  Klasovsky,  former  Chief, 
Plans  and  Property  Branch,  Engineering  Division,  DEH,  proved  invaluable  in  answer¬ 
ing  questions  about  countless  details  of  Fort  Clayton’s  development.  Mr.  Stuart  G.  R. 


iv 


Warner,  USARSO  Historian,  provided  archival  materials  located  at  U.S.  installations 
in  the  RoP.  Mr.  Warner,  Mr.  Klasovsky,  and  LTC  Staffieri  all  served  as  reviewers  for  this 
project,  as  did  Mr.  Stanley  Leon,  former  Staff  Engineer,  DEH.  Their  knowledge, 
insight,  attention,  and  thoughtful  comments  improved  the  quality  of  this  effort. 

The  USARSO  Public  Affairs  Office  provided  us  with  hundreds  of  photographs  to 
consider  for  inclusion.  Mr.  Charles  S.  McElroy  of  the  Tropic  Times  was  particularly 
helpful  in  providing  useful  photographic  and  textual  information.  Several  individu¬ 
als  currently  possess  large  private  collections  of  photographs  pertaining  to  Fort 
Clayton.  For  their  generosity  in  providing  us  access  to  their  collections,  we  are 
indebted  to  Mr.  Vicente  A.  Pascual,  Mr.  George  M.  Chevalier,  Mr.  James  H.  Sauer, 
and  Mr,  Robert  Karrer. 

Several  individuals  graciously  consented  to  interviews  and  allowed  us  to  use  some 
of  their  remarks  verbatim  in  the  book.  We  would  especially  like  to  thank  Mr.  Leon 
as  well  as  Mr.  Sauer,  Mr.  Richard  Holzer,  Mr.  David  Clark,  Mr.  Robert  H.  Tippett,  Mr. 
Wayne  Worthington,  Mr.  Robert  Maki,  and  Mr.  Allan  R.  Small.  Through  a  letter  to  the 
members  of  the  33rd  Infantry  Regimental  Combat  Team  Association,  we  came  into 
contact  with  dozens  of  veterans  who  had  served  in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone,  many 
on  Fort  Clayton  itself.  In  particular,  Mr.  Louie  C.  Jenkins  and  Mr.  Martin  A.  Peters 
went  above  and  beyond  the  call.  Mr.  Jenkins  sent  us  a  goldmine  of  information,  par¬ 
ticularly  photographs.  Mr.  Peters,  not  content  with  sending  his  own  memoirs  and 
photos,  spent  weeks  contacting  other  veterans  who,  not  being  members  of  the  33rd 
Infantry  Association,  had  missed  our  request  for  information.  Through  the  corre¬ 
spondence  of  all  those  who  answered  our  plea,  we  have  been  privileged  to  gain 
access  to  personal  memories  and  photographs  which  brought  the  early  years  at 
Fort  Clayton  to  life  for  us.  Any  sense  of  Fort  Clayton  as  a  living  community  conveyed 
by  this  book  is  largely  due  to  their  willingness  to  share  a  particular  time  in  their 
lives.  They  all  recalled  Fort  Clayton  as  a  very  special  place,  held  in  their  hearts  with 
affection. 

With  such  a  wealth  of  textual  and  visual  resources  at  our  disposal,  and  only  a  lim¬ 
ited  number  of  pages  to  work  with,  it  was  inevitable  that  much  interesting  and 
engaging  information  could  not  be  included  directly  in  the  final  published  product. 
Each  and  every  submission  was  used  for  purposes  of  analysis  and  perspective,  but 
ultimately  we  had  to  eliminate  many  wonderful  contributions  for  no  reason  other 
than  a  regrettable  lack  of  space. 

The  individuals  acknowledged  above  provided  invaluable  information,  advice,  and 
support  in  the  preparation  of  this  book.  The  authors  thank  them  for  their  participa¬ 
tion,  but  take  sole  responsibility  for  any  errors  or  omissions. 

Dr.  Susan  I.  Enscore 

Suzanne  P.  Johnson 

Julie  L.  Webster,  RA 

Gordon  L.  Cohen 

September  2000 


v 


A  Brief  History  of  Operation  Transit . 5_27 

Notes  for  Chapter  5  . 5_30 

6  The  Cold  War  Era  and  New  Missions  (1946-1978) . 6-1 

The  Changing  Face  of  the  Postwar  World  . 6-1 

Continued  Postwar  Drawdown  . 6-2 

Command  Reorganizations  Through  the  Cold  War  . 6-2 

Impact  of  Cold  War-Era  Military  Conflicts  . 64 

The  Panamanian  Sovereignty  Movement  . 6-5 

Fort  Clayton  Becomes  a  Community . 6-8 

Cold  War  Era  Construction  Projects  . 6-12 

A  Home  to  the  Force . 6-32 

Notes  for  Chapter  6  . 5.33 

7  From  Treaty  to  Transfer  (1979-1999) . 7-1 

After  the  Treaty . 74 

New  Missions  After  the  Cold  War  . 7.3 

Fort  Clayton  and  Operation  Just  Cause . 74 

Post-Treaty  Construction  Projects . 7.3 

Reutilization  Scenarios  for  Fort  Clayton . 742 

Notes  for  Chapter  7  . 743 

8  The  Final  Chapter . 8-1 

The  Last  Drawdown  . 8-1 

The  Final  Face  of  Fort  Clayton . 8-2 

The  End  of  an  Era . . 

Notes  for  Chapter  8  . 84 

Images . . 

References . xjx 

Sidebar  Articles 

A  President's  Haunting  Memories  of  Panama . 1-2 

Tropical  Flora  and  Military  Discipline . 2-5 

The  Ever-Present  Bohio . 2-11 

Life  at  Fort  Clayton  and  in  the  Canal  Zone . 3-5 

Another  Wartime  Challenge:  Disease  and  Medicine  in  the  Tropics . 5-16 

Meanwhile,  Back  at  the  Movies . 641 


viii 


Table  of  Contents 

Preface . iii 

1  Origins  of  the  U.S.  Presence  in  Panama  (1513-1917) . 1-1 

Early  European  Exploration  and  Colonization  of  the  Isthmus . 1-1 

The  U.S.  Becomes  Interested . 1-2 

Panama's  Political  Development  and  Independence . 1-3 

The  U.S.  Builds  a  Canal  . 1-3 

Origins  of  the  U.S.  Role  in  Panama  Canal  Defense . 14 

Notes  for  Chapter  1  . 1-9 

2  Standing  Up  Fort  Clayton  (1917-1922) . 2-1 

Protecting  the  Miraflores  Locks . 2-1 

Canal  Defense  Plans  and  the  Cronkhite  Board . 2-1 

Colonel  Clayton  is  Honored . 2-3 

Site  Geography  and  Landforms . 2-3 

Tradition  and  Innovation  in  Post  Design  . 24 

Tropical  Facility  Design  and  Functionality  . 2-7 

The  Construction  Program  . 2-12 

The  Infantry  Moves  In . 2-14 

The  First  36  Buildings . 2-15 

Completion  of  Original  Infantry  Post  Construction . 2-26 

Fort  Clayton’s  Place  in  the  Canal  Defense  Mission . 2-28 

Notes  for  Chapter  2  . 2-29 

3  Settling  in  for  the  Century: 

Between  the  Wars  at  Fort  Clayton  (1923-1935) . . . 3-1 

Funding  Stagnation  and  Facility  Disrepair . 3-1 

The  Fort  Clayton  Training  Mission . 3-2 

New  Construction  During  the  Early  1930s  . 3-10 

World  Shrinks,  Insecurity  Grows . 3-37 

Notes  for  Chapter  3  . 3-38 

4  Hostilities  on  Two  Horizons  (1936-1941) . 4-1 

The  Changing  Canal  Defense  Mission . 4-1 

Reorganizing  for  the  Emergency . 4-1 

Canal  Priority  in  the  1939  Defense  Augmentation  Program  . 4-3 

The  Construction  Program . 4-5 

Ready  or  Not . 4-24 

Notes  for  Chapter  4  . 4-24 

5  Transit  Through  the  Second  World  War  (1941-1945) . 5-1 

Fort  Clayton's  Role  in  World  War  II  . 5-1 

Midwar  Reduction  in  Force . 5-5 

Wartime  Construction  at  Fort  Clayton . 5-5 

vii 


CHAPTER  1 


Origins  of  the  U.S.  Presence  in  Panama  (1513- 1917) 

Early  European  Exploration  and  Colonization 
of  the  Isthmus 

Over  the  course  of  the  20th  century,  the  Panama  Canal  has  most  often  been  associ¬ 
ated  with  the  United  States,  but  interest  in  the  concept  of  a  navigable  passage  from 
the  Atlantic  Ocean  to  the  Pacific  through  the  isthmus  was  born  almost  five  centuries 
ago  in  Europe.  Christopher  Columbus  searched  for  such  a  waterway  on  his  final 
voyage.  Vasco  Nunez  de  Balboa  crossed  the  isthmus  overland  in  1513  and  claimed  it 
for  Spain  on  his  way  to  discovering  the  Pacific  Ocean.  The  tantalizing  closeness  of 
the  two  oceans  immediately  inspired  ideas  of  engineering  a  connecting  waterway. 

Charles  I  of  Spain  (Holy  Roman  Emperor  Charles  V)  desired  such  a  passage,  and  in 
1534  he  issued  a  royal  decree  to  the  regional  governor  ordering  that  a  survey  be 
conducted  to  determine  the  feasibility  of  excavating  a  canal.  The  governor  reported 
that  the  survey  showed  such  a  feat  would  be  impossible,  but  the  prospective  route 
surveyed  from  the  Chagres  River  to  the  Pacific  did  in  fact  come  close  to  the  actual 
canal  route  plotted  centuries  later. 

Soon  after  Balboa’s  historic  discovery,  European  awareness  of  the  Pacific  coast 
spurred  an  interest  in  creating  new  settlements.  In  1519  Isthmian  Governor  Pedro 
Arias  de  Avila  (Pedrarias  Davila)  founded  Panama  City,1  and  this  settlement  quickly 
evolved  into  the  Pacific  terminus  for  the  two  major  trans-isthmian  routes:  the 
Camino  Real  and  the  Las  Cruces  Trail.  The  Camino  Real  led  overland  across  to  the 
Atlantic  coast  towns  of  Portobelo  and  Nombre  de  Dios.  The  Las  Cruces  Trail  led 
overland  to  the  interior  town  of  Las  Cruces,  then  utilized  the  Chagres  River  to  com¬ 
plete  the  crossing  at  the  port  of  San  Lorenzo.  These  trails  became  an  important  part 
of  the  trade  route  between  Spain  and  South  America,  facilitating  the  exchange  of 
South  American  precious  metals  and  other  raw  materials  for  goods  produced  in 
Europe.  During  the  1600s,  coastal  raids  by  English  pirates  compelled  Spain  to  build 
fortifications  at  their  isthmian  ports.  The  raids  continued,  however,  and  by  the  mid- 
1700s  Spanish  merchants  had  found  it  more  profitable  to  avoid  the  isthmus  alto¬ 
gether,  sailing  their  ships  around  Cape  Horn  instead.  For  the  next  200  years,  then, 

Panama  served  a  greatly  diminished  role  as  a  trade  route.2 

The  political  situation  changed  drastically  in  the  early  19th  century  as  revolutionary 
movements  in  Central  and  South  America  ended  Spanish  colonial  rule  in  the 
region.  Panama  declared  its  independence  from  Spain  on  28  November  1821.  To 
support  its  bid  for  independence  the  new  leaders  of  Panama  needed  military  sup¬ 
port.  As  a  result  they  decided  to  unite  with  the  newly  liberated  Republic  of  Gran 
Colombia  to  the  south,  founded  two  years  earlier  by  Venezuelan  revolutionary 
Simon  Bolivar.  (Gran  Colombia  included  today’s  nations  of  Colombia,  Venezuela, 
and  Ecuador.)  When  Gran  Colombia  split  apart  in  1831  Panama  was  annexed  by  the 
new  Republic  of  Colombia.3 


A  President's  Haunting  Memories  of  Panama 


In  the  mid-1800s,  before  the  comple¬ 
tion  of  a  transcontinental  railroad, 
the  fastest  way  from  the  U.S.  Atlantic 
coast  to  California  was  by  sailing  to 
Panama,  then  riding  overland  across 
the  isthmus  followed  by  another 
marine  voyage  up  the  Pacific  coast. 
The  shortest  land  route  across  the 
isthmus  involved  a  float  up  the  Cha- 
gres  River  to  Gorgona  or  Cruces, 
then  a  journey  of  about  25  miles  via 
mule  path  to  Panama  City.  During 
the  dry  season  this  leg  of  the  trip 
was  not  bad,  but  during  the  rainy 
season  it  could  amount  to  a  horren¬ 
dous  week-long  ordeal.  By  the  time 
General  Ulysses  S.  Grant  was  inaugu¬ 
rated  as  the  18th  U.S.  president,  the 
potential  benefits  of  an  isthmian 


canal  were  well  known  to  many  polit¬ 
ical  and  business  leaders.  But  in  the 
mind  of  President  Grant,  Panama 
represented  something  much  differ¬ 
ent  than  a  parcel  of  tropical  reed 
estate  with  commercial  potential. 

In  July  1852,  the  young  Lieutenant 
U.S.  Grant  (Brevet  Captain)  served 
as  regimental  quartermaster  for  the 
U.S.  Army  Fourth  Infantry,  which 
had  been  ordered  to  garrison  duty  in 
San  Francisco  via  Panama  in 
response  to  a  jurisdictional  dispute 
brewing  with  England  over  the  Ore¬ 
gon  Territory.  Grant  was  in  charge  of 
the  feeding,  shelter,  transportation, 
and  baggage  of  several  hundred  sol¬ 
diers  and  their  dependents.  The  trek 


The  U.S.  Becomes  Interested 

The  1848  discovery  of  gold  in  California  focused  U.S.  interest  on  the  isthmus  as  a 
shortcut  from  the  east  coast  to  the  west  coast.  At  that  time  the  first  U.S.  transconti¬ 
nental  rail  line  had  not  yet  been  completed,  and  by  1849  thousands  of  men  were 
crossing  the  isthmus  every  year  to  seek  their  fortune.  Despite  terrible  physical  con¬ 
ditions,  the  crossing  was  worth  it  as  traveling  from  New  York  to  San  Francisco  via 
the  isthmus  instead  of  Cape  Horn  saved  8000  miles.  In  1850,  the  American-owned 
Panama  Railway  Company  began  construction  of  an  isthmian  railway.  The  rail  line 
was  completed  after  5  years  at  a  cost  of  $8  million  and  the  lives  of  almost  6000  work¬ 
ers.  However,  the  isthmian  railroad  proved  to  be  an  instant  financial  windfall,  with 
profits  in  the  first  6  years  of  operation  exceeding  $7  million.  The  railroad  carried 
more  than  400,000  passengers  in  its  first  10  years.4 

The  success  of  the  Panama  Railroad  explicitly  demonstrated  the  demand  for  and 
value  of  a  travel  shortcut  across  the  isthmus.  American  interests  soon  focused  on 
the  proposed  utility  and  economic  return  a  canal  would  provide,  but  the  French— 
who  purchased  construction  rights  from  Colombia  in  1879-took  the  first  initiative. 
Under  French  auspices  in  1881,  construction  began  on  a  sea-level  canal  across  the 
narrowest  part  of  the  isthmus.  By  1889  financial  troubles,  disease,  and  inadequate 


across  the  isthmus  quickly  degener¬ 
ated  into  a  nightmare  that  Grant 
would  never  forget  In  addition  to 
logistical  disasters  such  as  lost  sup¬ 
plies  and  price  gouging  for  trans¬ 
portation,  cholera  ravaged  the  group 
of  800.  Grant  saw  150  members  of  his 
party-men,  women,  and  children- 
die  of  disease  before  arriving  at 
Camp  Benecia  after  51  days.  He  later 
wrote  that  “  [t]he  horrors  of  the  rainy 
season  are  beyond  description.”6  In 
light  of  Grant’s  experience  it  is  per¬ 
haps  understandable  that,  as  Presi¬ 
dent  of  the  United  States,  he 
advocated  the  construction  of  an 
Isthmian  Canal  through  Nicaragua— 
not  Panama.7 


1-2 


machinery  combined  to  force  an  end  to  the  Compagnie  Universelle  du  Canal  Inte- 
roceanique  de  Panama.5 

Panama’s  Political  Development  and  Independence 

With  the  original  French  Panama  Canal  company  out  of  the  picture,  U.S.  interest  in 
a  canal  sharply  increased.  The  Compagnie  Nouvelle  du  Canal  de  Panama,  a  reorga¬ 
nized  version  of  the  defunct  company,  agreed  to  sell  its  assets  to  the  U.S.  for  $40  mil¬ 
lion.  However,  Colombia  refused  to  agree  to  the  deal.  This  obstacle  ultimately  was 
removed  when,  on  3  November  1903,  a  group  of  prominent  Panamanians  led  by  Dr. 
Manuel  Amador  Guerrero  declared  Panama’s  independence  from  Colombia.  A  U.S. 
ship,  the  Nashville ,  along  with  U.S.  military  troops,  intervened  to  protect  the 
Panama  Railroad.  The  result  of  this  intervention  was  to  prevent  Colombian  troops  at 
Colon  from  capturing  the  revolutionary  leaders  at  Panama  City.  Consequently,  there 
was  nothing  to  stop  the  revolution,  and  3  days  later  the  United  States  formally  recog¬ 
nized  the  new  Republic  of  Panama. 

On  18  November  1903  the  United  States  and  Panama  entered  into  the  Hay-Bunau- 
Varilla  Treaty,  granting  the  United  States  “in  perpetuity  the  use,  occupation,  and 
control”  of  a  10-mile  wide  strip  of  land  across  the  isthmus  to  construct  and  defend  a 
canal,  with  “all  the  rights,  power  and  authority  within  the  zone  . . .  which  the  United 
States  would  possess  and  exercise  if  it  were  the  sovereign  of  the  territory.”8  The 
United  States  agreed  to  compensate  Panama  with  the  sum  of  $10  million,  plus  an 
annuity  of  $250,000  per  year  after  canal  completion.  It  is  of  considerable  interest 
that  no  Panamanian  citizen  actually  signed  this  treaty;  the  signatory  parties  were  the 
U.S.  Secretary  of  State  John  Hay  and  French  diplomat  Philippe  Bunau-Varilla,  the 
latter  acting  as  an  official  agent  for  Panama  in  the  treaty  negotiations.9 

The  U.S.  Builds  a  Canal 

The  French  property  on  the  isthmus  was  officially  turned  over  to  the  United  States 
on  19  May  1904.  Colon  and  Panama  City  were  located  outside  the  Canal  Zone  [1.01]. 
Work  on  the  monumental  project  began  slowly  through  several  hard  years  of  dis¬ 
ease  and  failure.  Then  William  C.  Gorgas  was  appointed  Chief  Sanitary  Officer,  and 
thanks  to  his  efforts,  the  rampant  populations  of  disease-carrying  mosquitoes  were 
controlled  and  reduced  substantially.  As  disease  among  the  labor  force  abated  con¬ 
struction  could  begin  in  earnest,  and  by  the  end  of  1906  the  project  employed 
almost  24,000  workers.10 

As  excavation  got  underway  the  engineers  addressed  final  details  of  canal  design. 
A  dam  for  the  Chagres  River,  nearly  a  mile  and  a  half  long  and  over  100  ft  high, 
would  be  built  at  Gatun.  The  backed-up  water,  Gatun  Lake,  would  rise  to  85  ft 
above  sea  level.  A  ship  would  enter  three  locks  built  on  the  Atlantic  side  of  the 
dam,  elevate  to  the  level  of  the  lake,  float  23  miles  across  the  lake  and  9  miles  more 
along  a  channel  blasted  and  scooped  clear  through  the  continental  divide.  At 
Pedro  Miguel  there  would  be  a  lock  and  small  dam.  The  ship  would  be  lowered  31 
ft  to  a  small  lake,  then  pass  through  two  locks  at  Miraflores  and  return  to  sea  level 
on  the  Pacific  side.11 


1-3 


[1.01]  Bird's-eye  view  of  the  canal  and  Canal 
Zone,  from  sea  to  sea. 


The  struggle  to  dig  a  channel  through  the  continental  divide  took  seven  seemingly 
endless  years  [1.02].  The  most  difficult  setbacks  were  the  mudslides,  particularly  at 
Cucaracha  on  the  east  bank.  This  mammoth  excavation,  officially  designated  as  the 
Culebra  Cut,  was  known  to  the  men  who  created  it  as  “Hell’s  Gorge.”  Work  on  the 
locks  began  in  1909  and  took  about  4  years.  The  lock  chambers  were  built  of  con¬ 
crete,  and  the  lock  gates  were  steel.  The  lock  walls  were  1000  ft  long,  110  ft  wide, 
and  80  ft  high.  Six  pairs  of  chambers  were  built  (to  handle  two  lanes  of  traffic).  Each 
set  of  locks  was  operated  through  a  central  control  board.12 


By  the  summer  of  1913  the  locks  and  the  Culebra  Cut  were  finished.  On  26  Septem¬ 
ber  1913  water  was  first  released  into  the  locks.  In  1914  President  Woodrow  Wilson 
named  Chief  Engineer  George  Washington  Goethals  as 
the  first  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal.13  The  canal 
administration  was  a  civilian  agency  but  the  position  of 
Governor  was  always  filled  with  a  military  officer  from  the 
Army  Corps  of  Engineers.  On  15  August  1914  the  canal 
officially  became  operational  when  the  ship  Ancon  suc¬ 
cessfully  completed  a  transit  between  the  oceans  [1.03]. 14 

Origins  of  the  U.S.  Role 
in  Panama  Canal  Defense 

Defense-Related  Treaty  Provisions 

The  Hay-Pauceforte  and  Hay-Bunau-Varilla  treaties 
implied  but  did  not  explicitly  grant  the  United  States  the 
right  to  fortify  the  Canal  Zone.15  Central  to  the  U.S.  deci- 


[1.02]  Soldiers  on  steam  shovel  in  Culebra  Cut. 


1-4 


MM  CLE'/ELAND 


-  Tkr  Mprrtrd  Lit*  nf  Hsjtrt  tmd  i 

AM*  C*r*S***'M  i*rU),  "Ciw  in  ,nd 

JWv'l  H*r*>r*pr  .  ! 

i  S/«>  Dwa.  Ci/b.  fmmMt  D*K,r  .  U 

i  5mm  PrrttnfAT  R*«mrh  Ah,*l  lm|  «wr 

.»•  c»(r  cw«- . « 

“  wt.  PWnum  0^*il*  Amid  H*P**ic 

kirrWni> . I. 

i  ./vJ  W. If  Wn  ‘fix 


[1.03]  ‘Uncle  Sam'  at  the  Panama  Canal,  illus¬ 
trated  in  a  commemorative  article  on  the  20th 
anniversary  of  the  opening  of  the  Panama 
Canal. 


sion  to  fortify  the  canal  was  Article  Three  of  the  Hay-Bunau-Variila  treaty,  which 
gave  the  United  States  all  powers,  rights,  and  authority  in  the  Canal  Zone.  The  issue 
of  canal  fortification  was  debated  until  1911,  when  the  House  of  Representatives 
appropriated  $2  million  for  that  purpose.  The  following  year  Congress  added  $1  mil¬ 
lion  for  gun  and  mortar  batteries  and  $200,000  for  land  defenses.  Construction  of 
fortifications  began  on  7  August  1911  under  Sydney  Williamson,  Goethals’  Chief  of 
the  Pacific  Division.  On  1  January  1912,  Goethals’  son,  Lieutenant  George  R. 
Goethals,  was  put  in  charge  of  the  fortification  project. 

Large  forts  with  gun  batteries  were  to  be  built  at  each  end  of  the  canal,  with  field¬ 
work  for  6000  mobile  force  troops  (infantry,  cavalry,  engineer,  signal,  and  field 
artillery)  in  between.  The  work  of  The  Panama  Canal  staff  increased  significantly 


1-5 


with  the  1915  military  appropriation  of  $1.29  million  and  the  subsequent  assignment 
of  Army  barracks  and  quarters  construction.  All  design  and  construction  work  for 
Army  post  buildings  was  assigned  to  The  Panama  Canal  since  they  had  a  great  deal 
of  experience  building  facilities  during  the  initial  canal  construction  effort.  Much  of 
the  early  military  construction  undertaken  by  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Army  made 
use  of  existing  designs  and  building  material  specifications.  By  June  1915  almost  $15 
million  had  been  spent  on  fortifying  the  canal,  including  the  locks  and  dams.  Mili¬ 
tary  reservations  were  officially  established  on  18  September  1917,  designated  as 
Fort  Grant,  Fort  Amador,  Fort  Sherman,  Fort  Randolph,  and  Fort  de  Lesseps.16 

Early  U.S.  Military  Missions  in  Panama 

The  first  U.S.  troops  had  arrived  on  the  isthmus  long  before  the  construction  of  per¬ 
manent  military  installations.  As  previously  noted,  in  1903  a  detachment  of  U.S. 
Marines  kept  the  Panama  Railroad  open  during  the  Panamanian  revolution  for  inde¬ 
pendence.  Two  companies  of  Marines  under  the  command  of  Major  John  A. 
Lejuene  made  camp  in  the  canal  construction  town  of  Empire.  By  January  1904  two 
reinforcing  Marine  battalions  arrived  on  the  isthmus.  The  Marines  were  consoli¬ 
dated  at  a  location  designated  Camp  Elliott,  at  the  construction  town  of  Bas  Obispo. 
For  the  next  10  years  the  Marines  stationed  there  provided  security  for  the  canal 
construction  effort.  The  Marines  remained  until  January  1914  when  their  role  was 
reassigned  to  the  Army.  In  1923  the  Marines  returned  to  Panama  as  a  continual  pres¬ 
ence  with  the  establishment  of  the  Marine  Barracks  at  Coco  Solo.17 

Permanent  Troops  Arrive 

Infantry  would  be  central  to  the  strategy  and  tactics  of  canal  defense,  in  large  part 
due  to  the  lock-based  design  of  the  canal.  Because  the  locks  were  critical  points  in 
the  transit,  protecting  them  was  a  high-priority  military  concern.  As  one  infantry 
colonel  wrote  in  a  1925  military  journal  article,  “It  is  correct  to  say  that  the  mission 
of  the  Infantry  in  the  Canal  Zone  is  primarily  to  protect  the  canal  locks  and  their 
essential  accessories  against  hostile  raids  by  land  forces.”18 

The  first  permanent  Army  troops  in  Panama  (the  10th  Infantry)  arrived  on  4  October 
1911  and  set  up  a  camp  called  E.  S.  Otis,  using  some  old  barracks  originally  built  for 
the  ill-fated  French  canal  project.  The  5th  Infantry  joined  the  regiment  on  25  Novem¬ 
ber  1914  and  moved  into  old  canal  buildings  in  the  town  of  Empire.  The  force 
expanded  again  on  15  March  1915  when  the  29th  Infantry  arrived  and  encamped  in 
the  former  construction  town  of  Culebra.19  Reorganization  on  1  July  1916  resulted  in 
the  creation  of  the  33rd  Infantry  from  elements  of  the  5th  and  10th  Infantries.  Mem¬ 
bers  of  the  33rd  Infantry  took  up  their  station  in  old  canal  buildings  at  Gatun,  on  the 
Atlantic  side  of  the  canal.20 

Guarding  the  approaches  to  the  canal  was  the  primary  mission  of  the  Coast 
Artillery  Corps,  whose  forts  at  both  ends  of  the  canal  were  armed  with  the  largest 
guns  available.  When  the  coastal  batteries  were  sufficiently  completed,  Coast 
Artillery  troops  began  to  arrive  on  the  isthmus.  The  first  group  to  land,  the  81st  Com¬ 
pany,  arrived  on  22  December  1913  and  proceeded  to  their  camp,  the  future  site  of 


1-6 


“Pay  was  about  $15  a  month  for  a  private;  a  sergeant  got  about 
$30  and  the  first  sergeant  got  $40  or  $45  . . .  Each  man  would 
be  paid,  and  then  he  would  go  through  the  pay  line  for  company 
collections.  He  had  to  pay  the  barber,  the  man  who  did  the  laun¬ 
dry,  and  pay  his  bill  at  the  exchange.  Each  company  usually  had 
a  pool  table,  also,  and  collection  was  made  for  its  maintenance 
in  the  pay  line.  Rations  cost  about  30  cents  a  day,  and  if  I  had  to 
eat  a  meal  in  the  company  it  cost  me  about  10  cents  ...  the 
men  used  to  contribute  about  one  dollar  a  month  in  the  pay  line 
to  increase  the  rations  in  the  mess  hall.  The  cooks  would  go  out 
and  buy  items  that  weren’t  usually  scheduled  on  the  menu.” 

Major  General  Franklin  Sibert21 


Fort  Amador.  During  the  next  year,  the  199th,  44th,  21st,  45th,  and  144th  Companies 
joined  the  Coast  Artillery  Corps.  In  1915  these  forces  were  supplemented  by  the 
16th,  116th,  and  40th  Companies.  By  May  1916,  the  Coast  Artillery  was  completed  with 
the  arrival  of  the  8th,  15th,  73rd,  87th,  and  124th  Companies.  Within  a  few  years,  these 
artillery  troops  were  all  in  permanent  quarters  at  Fort  Amador  on  the  Pacific  side 
and  Forts  Sherman,  Randolph,  and  De  Lesseps  on  the  Atlantic.  Reorganization  in 
July  1924  resulted  in  these  units  being  assigned  to  either  the  1st,  2nd,  4th,  or  65th 
Coast  Artillery  Regiment.22 

Various  other  troops  arrived  during  this  time  period  to  augment  the  infantry  and 
artillery  personnel  on  the  isthmus.  The  1st  squadron  of  the  12th  Cavalry  arrived  in 
March  1915  and  remained  until  1921  when  the  Army  was  reorganized.  Also  in  March 
1915,  a  platoon  of  signal  corps  troops  arrived.  The  first  engineer  unit  assigned  to  the 
garrison  arrived  in  May  of  the  same  year.  Company  M,  3rd  Battalion  of  Engineers 
soon  began  the  first  military  survey  of  the  area.  They  became  part  of  the  11th  Engi¬ 
neers  in  November  1920.  Field  artillery  troops  were  the  next  to  arrive  when  the  2nd 
Battalion,  4th  Field  Artillery  landed  in  March  1916.  The  field  artillery  troops  were 
tasked  with  supporting  the  infantry  in  the  Canal  Zone.  One  year  later  a  fledgling 
Army  Air  Corps  presence  was  established  with  the  arrival  of  the  7th  Aero  Squadron, 
whose  mission  was  to  provide  aerial  reconnaissance  capabilities  in  cooperation 
with  Navy  and  Coast  Artillery  forces  in  the  Canal  Zone.23 

Impact  of  U.S.  Defense  Buildup  and  World  War  I 

The  buildup  of  U.S.  troops  on  the  isthmus  required  new  organizations  for  more 
effective  administration  of  the  garrison.  A  consolidated  command  called  United 
States  Troops,  Panama  Canal  Zone  was  established  on  6  January  1915  under 


1-7 


Brigadier  General  C.  R.  Edwards,  as  part  of  the  Eastern  Department  of  the  U.S. 
Army.  The  troop  buildup  had  increased  the  military  strength  in  the  Canal  Zone  to 
approximately  5000  when  the  United  States  entered  World  War  I  on  6  April  1917. 
President  Wilson,  in  an  Executive  Order  dated  9  April  1917,  transferred  authority 
over  the  Panama  Canal  and  the  Canal  Zone  from  the  Canal  Zone  Governor  to  Gen¬ 
eral  Edwards.  A  Presidential  Proclamation  was  used  to  declare  the  ‘neutrality’  of  the 
canal  on  23  May  1917.  This  order  restricted  the  ability  of  all  military  and  military  sup¬ 
port  ships  (except  those  flying  the  U.S.  flag)  to  stop  during  canal  transit  for  receiv¬ 
ing  supplies  or  fuel,  or  to  unload  troops  or  ammunition.  This  proclamation  also 
regulated  use  of  docking  and  repair  facilities,  length  of  stay  in  the  area,  use  of  radios 
aboard  ship,  and  use  of  air  space  by  planes.  Enemy  ships  could  continue  to  use  the 
canal,  but  they  were  required  to  get  permission  from  the  canal  authorities.24 

During  World  War  I  canal  defense  remained  among  the  highest  priority  concerns  of 
U.S.  military  leaders.  The  need  to  rapidly  move  troops,  military  ships,  and  supplies 
remained  critical,  and  the  sabotage  or  destruction  of  a  lock  (rather  than  wholesale 
capture  of  the  canal)  was  considered  the  worst-case  scenario: 

The  extreme  improbability  of  an  enemy  being  able  to  capture  the  canal  intact 
and  of  being  able  to  hold  it  and  use  it,  made  it  practically  certain  that  the  objec¬ 
tive  of  hostile  operations  in  the  Panama  Area,  at  least  during  the  early  period  of 
a  war,  would  be  the  damage  [or]  destruction  of  the  canal  rather  than  the  occu¬ 
pation  of  the  Canal  Zone.25 


To  guard  against  this  likely  enemy  strategy  it  was  necessary  to  block  attacks  by  sea, 
land,  and  air.  Since  this  had  been  the  military  mission  in  Panama  all  along  the 
troops  necessary  to  provide  this  security  were  already  in  place. 


The  possibility  of  sabotage  by  enemy  agents  was  considered  a  real  threat,  and 
direct  initiative  was  taken  to  alleviate  the  danger.  Ships  were  checked  before  transit 
through  the  carnal,  and  any  German  nationals  on  board— both  passengers  and 
crew-were  removed.  They  were  transported  under  guard  by  rail  to  the  other  termi¬ 
nus  where  they  reboarded.  All  German  subjects  living  in  the  Canal  Zone  or  the 
Republic  of  Panama  were  identified  and  watched.26 

Due  to  the  wartime  demands  for  troops  a  number  of  units  were  transferred  out  of 
the  Panama  garrison.  Between  May  1917  and  October  1918  the  10th,  5th,  and  29th 
Infantries  returned  to  the  United  States.  A  regiment  of  the  Puerto  Rican  Infantry 
arrived  in  May  1917  to  replace  the  10th  Infantry,  and  was  quartered  at  Camp  Gaillard. 

The  demands  of  wartime  also  resulted  in  more  administrative  changes  for  the  Army. 
On  1  July  1917  a  separate  geographical  department-the  Panama  Canal  Department 
of  the  United  States  Army-was  created.  Its  first  commander  was  Brigadier  General 
Adelbert  Cronkhite.27 

As  the  war  progressed  it  became  clear  that  U.S.  forces  in  Panama  were  not  going  to 
be  actively  involved  in  combat.  No  large-scale  transits  of  U.S.  or  Allied  fleets 
occurred,  and  the  canal  was  never  in  danger  of  an  attack  in  force.  The  Panama  Canal 
remained  secure  and  peaceful.  President  Wilson  returned  control  of  the  canal  to  the 
Governor,  The  Panama  Canal  by  Executive  Order  No.  3032  on  25  January  1919. 


“I  am  fortunate  in  being 
able  to  report  that  the  Canal 
was  operated  and 
maintained  during  the 
period  of  the  war  without 
mishap  or  delay  to  vessels 
using  its  facilities;  that  no 
acts  of  injury  or  destruction 
were  committed  against  the 
Canal  or  any  of  its 
structures." 

Chester  Harding,  Governor 
of  The  Panama  Canal28 


1-8 


Notes  for  Chapter  1 

1  Hugh  Gordon  Miller,  The  Isthmian  Highway: 
A  Review  of  the  Problems  of  the  Caribbean 
(New  York:  MacMillan  Co.,  1929),  7;  John  0. 
Collins,  The  Panama  Guide  (Mount  Hope, 

CZ:  I.C.C.  Press,  1912),  57. 

2  John  and  Mavis  Biesanz,  The  People  of 
Panama  (New  York:  Columbia  University 
Press,  1955),  25;  Suzanne  Johnson,  An  Ameri¬ 
can  Legacy  in  Panama:  A  Brief  History  of  the 
Department  of  Defense  Installations  and 
Properties,  the  Former  Canal  Zone,  Republic 
of  Panama  (Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  United  States 
Army  Garrison-Panama,  1995),  5;  Miller,  The 
Isthmian  Highway,  7;  Collins,  The  Panama 
Guide,  57. 

3  David  McCullough,  The  Path  Between  the 
Seas:  The  Creation  of  the  Panama  Canal, 
1870-1914  (New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster, 
1977),  28-30;  Miles  P.  DuVal,  Cadiz  to  Cathay: 
The  Story  of  the  Long  Struggle  for  a  Waterway 
Across  the  American  Isthmus  (Stanford,  CA: 
Stanford  University  Press,  1940),  21-23. 

4  McCullough,  Path  Between  the  Seas,  34-36. 

5  McCullough,  Path  Between  the  Seas,  44,  235; 
Johnson,  American  Legacy  in  Panama,  7. 

6  Kirkpatrick,  R.Z.,  “General  Grant  in  Panama,” 
The  Military  Engineer,  vol  XXVI,  no.  146; 
McCullough,  Path  Between  the  Seas, 

37-38. 

7  “Speech  for  1997  Army  Birthday  Ball” 
authored  by  Stuart  G.  R.  Warner,  Archivist, 
U.S.  Army  South  (USARSO),  Fort  Clayton. 

The  text  was  intended  for  presentation  by  BG 
Philip  R.  Kensinger,  Jr.,  Commanding 
General,  USARSO,  on  14  June  1997. 

8  DuVal,  Cadiz  to  Cathay,  124,  130-131, 

138-140, 333-340,  482-492;  McCullough,  Path 
Between  the  Seas,  341-342, 371-377;  U.S. 
Senate,  A  Chronology  of  Events  Relating  to 
the  Panama  Canal:  Prepared  for  the  Commit¬ 
tee  on  Foreign  Relations  (Washington,  DC: 
GPO,  1977),  3;  Joseph  Bucklin  Bishop  and 
Farnham  Bishop,  Goethals:  Genius  of  the 
Panama  Canal  (New  York  and  London: 
Harper  and  Brothers  Publishers,  1930), 
117-119. 

9  Johnson,  American  Legacy  in  Panama,  9. 

10  Bishop  and  Bishop,  Goethals,  125-128; 
McCullough,  Path  Between  the  Seas,  448, 
457-473,  480. 


11  McCullough,  Path  Between  the  Seas, 

483-489. 

12  Ibid.,  549-554;  Bishop  and  Bishop,  Goethals, 
207-209. 

13  The  federal  agency  responsible  for  construc¬ 
tion  of  the  canal  was  the  Isthmian  Canal 
Commission.  Upon  completion  of  the  canal, 
this  agency  was  disbanded  on  1  April  1914.  A 
successor  organization  named  The  Panama 
Canal  was  created  to  operate  and  maintain 
the  canal  and  administer  the  Canal  Zone.  In 
1951  this  agency  was  reorganized  as  the 
Panama  Canal  Company  and  assigned 
responsibility  for  Canal  operations;  at  this 
time  an  associated  Canal  Zone  Government 
also  was  established  for  administering  the 
Canal  Zone.  These  agencies  remained  in 
place  until  the  Panama  Canal  Treaty  of  1977. 
Upon  treaty  implementation  on  1  October 
1979,  the  Panama  Canal  Company/Canal 
Zone  Government  was  disestablished  and 
replaced  by  the  Panama  Canal  Commission, 
a  joint  U.S.-Panamanian  agency  primarily 
concerned  with  canal  operations.  This 
administrative  body  remained  in  place  until 
transfer  of  the  canal  to  the  Republic  of 
Panama  on  31  December  1999.  At  that  time, 
control  transferred  to  Panama  under  the 
newly  established  Panama  Canal  Authority. 

14  McCullough,  Path  Between  the  Seas, 

594-599,  604-609;  Bishop  and  Bishop, 
Goethals,  260-264;  Herbert  Knapp  and  Mary 
Knapp,  Red,  White,  and  Blue  Paradise:  The 
American  Canal  Zone  in  Panama  (San  Diego, 
CA:  Harcourt  Brace  Jovanovich,  Publishers, 
1984),  124;  Gerstle  Mack,  The  Land  Divided: 

A  History  of  the  Panama  Canal  and  Other 
Isthmian  Canal  Projects  (New  York:  Alfred  A. 
Knopf,  1944),  513;  U.S.  Senate,  Chronology,  5. 

15  The  Hay-Pauceforte  Treaty  settled  a 
diplomatic  dispute  with  Great  Britain  over 
Isthmian  territory.  Secretary  of  State  John 
Hay  and  British  Ambassador  Sir  Julian 
Pauceforte  signed  a  treaty  on  18  November 
1901,  that  gave  the  U.S.  the  right  to  construct, 
own,  operate,  defend,  and  govern  a  canal. 

16  Logan  Marshall ,  The  Story  of  the  Panama 
Canal  (New  York:  L.T.  Myers,  1913),  202-203; 
Bishop  and  Bishop,  Goethals,  132,  221;  Mack, 
The  Land  Divided,  512-513;  Frederic  J. 

Haskin,  The  Panama  Canal  (Garden  City,  NY: 
Doubleday,  Page  &  Company,  1913),  283-284; 
The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the 
Governor  of  the  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal 
Year  Ended  June  30,  1915,  (Washington,  DC: 
GPO,  1915),  31-32;  George  M.  Wells,  Resident 


Engineer,  The  Panama  Canal  to  Governor, 
The  Panama  Canal,  27  January  1916,  Record 
Group  185,  Records  of  The  Panama  Canal, 
1914-1950,  Box  383,  Folder  2,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

17  Captain  J.H.  Reynold,  “Marines  in  Panama: 
1856-1976,”  Marine  Corps  Gazette  (October 
1976),  31-33. 

18  Colonel  Charles  R.  Howland,  “The  Infantry  in 
the  Canal  Zone,”  Infantry  Journal  26  (April 
1925),  382. 

19  The  29th  Infantry  camp  at  Culebra  was 
renamed  Camp  Gaillard  in  honor  of 
Lieutenant  Colonel  David  Gaillard,  the  man 
in  charge  of  excavating  the  Culebra  Cut. 

20  John  R.  Baldwin,  “History  of  the  Panama 
Canal  Department,"  Infantry  Journal  26  (April 
1925),  365-368. 

21  “Retired  Major  General  Recalls  Former  Days 
in  Canal  Zone,”  Southern  Command  News,  5 
December  1969,  10. 

22  Ibid.,  365-367;  Colonel  John  T.  Geary,  “The 
Coast  Artillery  in  Panama,”  Infantry  Journal 
26  (April  1925),  395. 

23  Ibid.,  366-367;  Captain  T.S.  Voss,  “The  Army 
Air  Service,”  Infantry  Journal  26  (April  1925), 
417. 

24  “The  Army  and  Navy:  The  military  and  naval 
activities  on  the  Canal  Zone  are  important  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  canal  enterprise,"  in  Panama 
Canal:  Twenty-Fifth  Anniversary,  1914-1939 
(Mount  Hope,  CZ:  The  Panama  Canal  Press, 
1939),  93-94;  Dolores  De  Mena,  “History  of  the 
United  States  Army  in  the  Panama  Canal  Area,” 
Unpublished  manuscript  (Fort  Clayton, 
Panama,  USARSO  History  Office,  1994),  4; 
Canal  Record,  13  June  1917, 515;  The  Panama 
Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The 
Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended  June 
30,  1917  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1917),  411-412. 

25  “War  Plans  and  Defense  Measures”  (n.p., 
circa  1948),  USARSO  History  Office  files, 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD,  5. 

26  Canal  Record,  12  February  1919, 291-293. 

27  “The  Army  and  Navy,”  94;  Baldwin,  “History 
of  the  Panama  Canal  Department,”  367-368; 
De  Mena,  “History  of  the  United  States 
Army,”  4. 

28  Canal  Record,  12  February  1919, 293. 


1-9 


CHAPTER  2 


Standing  Up  Fort  Clayton  (1917-1922) 

Protecting  the  Miraflores  Locks 

Fort  Clayton  was  built  on  the  Pacific  side  of  the  Panama  Canal,  on  a  site  adjacent  to 
the  Miraflores  Locks  and  near  Miraflores  Lake  and  the  Pedro  Miguel  Locks.  During 
canal  construction  the  area  that  would  become  Fort  Clayton  originally  served  as  a 
repository  (dump)  for  some  of  the  huge  volumes  of  material  excavated  from  the 
isthmus.  Enough  material  (or  “spoil”)  was  deposited  at  the  Balboa  Dump  near  the 
Pacific  entrance  to  create  a  causeway  linking  several  islands  to  the  mainland.  This 
engineered  landform  provided  the  future  sites  for  Forts  Amador  and  Grant.  Material 
excavated  from  a  little  farther  inland  was  deposited  near  the  Miraflores  Locks.  This 
site,  the  Miraflores  Dump,  was  put  to  use  by  U.S.  forces  as  early  as  24  April  1914 
when  a  security  presence  was  established  for  Miraflores.  One  company  of  soldiers 
from  the  10th  Infantry  established  a  camp  on  the  future  site  of  Fort  Clayton  and  pro¬ 
vided  security  for  the  locks  through  guards  and  mobile  patrols.  The  site  was  soon 
abandoned,  however,  due  to  the  advent  of  the  rainy  season  and  the  distance  from 
the  camp  to  the  locks;  the  patrol  moved  its  camp  to  the  east  lock  wall  at  Miraflores 
[2.01,2.02].' 

Canal  Defense  Plans  and  the  Cronkhite  Board 

Beginning  in  1915,  a  series  of  efforts  began  to  develop  a  coordinated  plan  for  canal 
defense,  including  the  construction  of  permanent  Army  posts  in  the  Canal  Zone.  In 
1916  a  Board  of  Officers  convened  to  develop  recommendations  for  the  siting  of 


[2.01]  The  Miraflores  dump  area,  future  site  of 
Fort  Clayton. 


2-1 


installations,  including  construction  cost  estimates.  This 
board’s  report,  issued  early  in  1917,  was  harshly  criticized 
by  higher  headquarters  because  the  troops  would  be  too 
dispersed,  and  this  approach  would  raise  construction 
costs  to  an  unacceptable  level.  Another  problem  was  that 
the  1916  board  recommended  the  use  of  frame  buildings, 
which  are  difficult  and  expensive  to  maintain  in  the  tropics. 
The  board’s  findings  were  rejected  and  it  was  decided  to 
convene  a  different  Board  of  Officers  to  provide  a  second 
analysis. 

The  new  Board  of  Officers  convened  in  June  1917  and,  like 
the  previous  board,  it  was  tasked  to  recommend  post  loca¬ 
tions  and  the  type  and  character  of  buildings  required.  The 
new  board  was  headed  by  Brigadier  General  Adelbert 
Cronkhite,  soon  to  be  named  commander  of  the  new 
Panama  Canal  Department  of  the  U.S.  Army.  The  board 
comprised  representatives  from  infantry,  cavalry,  field 
artillery,  and  the  engineer  and  medical  corps.  In  their 
report,  dated  28  August  1917,  the  Cronkhite  Board  recom¬ 
mended  placing  one  brigade  of  infantry  at  Gatun,  with  all 
other  mobile  force  troops  on  the  Pacific  side.  The  board 
recommended  placing  one  infantry  brigade  at  Miraflores 
Dump,  another  adjacent  to  the  Curundu  River,  and  one 
artillery  brigade  and  one  cavalry  regiment  south  of  Diablo 
Ridge.  Corozal  was  the  location  recommended  for  the  sani¬ 
tary  troops,  the  signal  corps  troops,  and  the  engineer  regi¬ 
ment,  as  well  as  for  the  main  supply  depot  site.  Quarry 
Heights,  built  on  the  site  of  the  former  Ancon  Quarry, 
would  serve  as  the  Army’s  department  and  division  head¬ 
quarters  in  Panama.  The  Cronkhite  Board  also  recom¬ 
mended  post  layouts  and  specific  building  construction 
details.  Many  of  this  board’s  recommendations  for  Fort 
Clayton— including  location  at  Miraflores  Dump—' were  sub¬ 
sequently  adopted.2 

By  1917  military  officials  had  expressed  the  need  to  formally 
acquire  land  for  defense  purposes,  and  engineers  in  the 
Panama  Canal  Department  (PCD)  surveyed  all  parcels  con¬ 
sidered  necessary.  The  resulting  list  was  submitted  to  the 
War  Department  on  27  April  1918,  and  the  Commanding 
General  of  the  Panama  Canal  Department  was  granted  per¬ 
mission  to  begin  acquisitions  on  3  June  1918.  As  the  parcels 
of  land  were  acquired,  they  were  officially  designated  as 
U.S.  military  reservations  through  a  series  of  Executive 
Orders  by  Woodrow  Wilson.  The  Curundu  Military  Reserva¬ 
tion,  which  would  encompass  Fort  Clayton,  the  Panama 


[2.02]  Surveyed  and  drawn  by  the  10th  U.S.  Infantry  in  1913,  this  map  shows 
the  future  site  of  Fort  Clayton  as  “Miraflores  Dump"  (near  bottom  right). 


2-2 


Arsenal,  the  Engineer  Depot,  and  the  Post  of  Corozal,  was 
formally  established  by  Executive  Order  No.  3207,  signed  by 
President  Wilson  on  30  December  1919  [2.03, 2.04]  ? 

Colonel  Clayton  is  Honored 

General  Order  91,  dated  19  July  1919,  named  the  new  Army 
post  at  Miraflores  Dump  in  honor  of  the  late  Colonel 
Bertram  T.  Clayton  [2.05].  Colonel  Clayton  had  served  as 
Quartermaster  of  the  Canal  Zone  military  forces  from 
1914-1917.  A  graduate  of  the  U.S.  Military  Academy,  Colonel 
Clayton  served  as  a  member  of  a  1915  defense  board  tasked 
with  formulating  plans  for  defending  the  canal.  As  such,  he 
contributed  to  the  creation  of  the  Army  installation  that 
would  bear  his  name.  Colonel  Clayton  was  killed  in  action 
in  France  on  30  May  1918.4 


[2.03]  Fill  has  been  completed,  1919,  and  construction  of  Fort  Clayton  is  set 
to  begin. 


On  31  May  1968  a  memorial  plaque  rededi¬ 
cating  the  post  in  honor  of  Colonel 
Bertram  Clayton  was  unveiled  on  the 
canal  side  of  Building  95.  Funding  for 
the  memorial  was  made  possible  through 
contributions  of  the  Fort  Clayton 
Officers '  Wives  and  the  Noncommissioned 
Officers'  Wives  Clubs.5  Designed  by  Army 
Specialist  P.T.  Kelley,  the  plaque  in 
part  reads:  "Killed  in  France  by  an 
enemy  shell,  after  a  life  distinguished 
by  outstanding  military  and  civil 
contributions . "6 

Site  Geography  and  Landforms 

The  land  set  aside  for  Fort  Clayton  included  landforms 
engineered  from  spoil  excavated  during  construction  of  the 
Miraflores  and  Pedro  Miguel  locks  as  well  as  the  canal 
itself.  The  western  edge  of  the  post  area  consisted  of  a 
broad,  flat  plain  that  overlooked  Miraflores  Locks  further  to 
the  west.  Approximately  20  ft  of  fill  dirt  was  deposited  over 
the  natural  surface  of  the  area,  and  it  was  graded  with  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  drainage  requirements  of  a  rainy  tropical  cli¬ 
mate.  The  land  rose  up  from  the  edge  of  the  canal  in  a 
moderate  slope  to  an  elevation  of  approximately  60  ft  at  the 
edge  of  the  fill  area.  The  plain  rose  slightly  to  the  north  and 
northeast— an  elevation  increase  of  approximately  30  ft  in  a 
little  more  than  half  a  mile.  The  site  had  excellent  charac¬ 
teristics  for  siting  a  fort,  and  the  engineers  and  architects 
took  good  advantage  of  them.  For  the  first  20  years  of  Fort 


m  on  my  way,  1T1  say  1  am, 

To  PANAMA. 

Where  old  “Jack  Frost”  has  lost 


Where  H.  C.  L  means  not  a  thing. 
With  Uncle  Sam  Ill  have  a  fling, 


In  PANAMA. 


The  Army  says  it  wants  some  men, 

In  PANAMA. 

Fve  been  through  France  and  on  the  Rhine. 

I  was  back  in  cits  and  feeling  fine. 

But  the  good  old  Army  life  for  mine, 

In  PANAMA. 

They  are  hunting,  fishing  and  swimming  now. 
In  PANAMA. 

And  a  soldiers  life  with  yonr  Uncle  Sam, 

Is  Ae  outdoor  life,  where  a  mans  a  man. 

So  Fm  on  my  way,  111  say  I  am, 

To  PANAMA. 


A  LIMITED  NUMBER  OF  MEN 
CAN  NOW  JOIN  FOR 
SERVICE  IN 


Infantry ,  Cavalry ,  Coast  Artillery,  Engineer  Corps,  Signal  Corps,  Medical 
Department,  Ordnance  Department  and  Quartermaster  Corps. 
-  ON  DUTY  IN  THE  PANAMA  CANAL  DEPARTMENT.  - 


JOIN  TO-DAY 

at 

NEAREST  ARMY  RECRUITING  STATION. 


[2.04]  Panama  Canal  Department,  Army  Enlistment  Poster. 


2-3 


Clayton’s  history  this  site  would  comprise  the  entire  built  area  of  the  reservation. 

Beyond  this  flat  plain  the  terrain  included  numerous  hills  and  valleys  that  had  been 
etched  out  of  the  land  at  different  rates  of  erosion.  At  their  highest  elevation  these 
hills  rose  approximately  400  ft  above  sea  level. 

About  a  mile  north-northeast  of  the  original  post  construction  site  was  the  junction 
of  the  Guanabano  and  Cardenas  Rivers.  To  the  south  of  that  point  the  Cardenas 
River  defined  the  southern  edge  of  the  property,  and  has  been  partially  channelized 
over  the  years  [2.06] .  The  fairly  steep  drop  in  elevation  into  the  river  valley,  and  the 
gradual  rise  on  the  other  side  (to  approximately  150  ft)  constitute  the  major  topo¬ 
graphic  feature  in  the  original  built-up  area  of  Fort  Clayton. 

Natural  vegetation  on  Fort  Clayton  was  predominately  semi-deciduous  seasonal  for¬ 
est,  with  some  grasslands  and  shrub  lands.  The  forest  vegetation  was  dense  and  lux¬ 
uriant,  and  like  all  vegetation  in  the  tropics,  it  grew  very  rapidly  [2.07].  The  built-up 
areas  of  the  post  displayed  landscape  material  planted  for  aesthetic  purposes, 
including  many  varieties  of  flowering  plants  such  as  hibiscus,  bougainvillea,  and  [2.05]  Colonel  Bertram  T.  Clayton, 
orchids.  Americans  stationed  in  Panama  saw  the  native  flora,  along  with  species 
introduced  by  previous  immigrants,  to  be  dramatic  and  exotic.  In  this  climate  and 
setting  it  was  natural  that  gardening  became  a  popular  pastime;  the  homes  in  the 
officer’s  quarters  areas  of  the  post  were  surrounded  with  naturalistic  planting 
arrangements.  The  main  streets  of  the  post  were  lined  with  mature  palm  trees,  and 
these  also  were  planted  in  other  areas  to  provide  shade  for  outdoor  activities.  A 
large,  open  recreation  area,  Clayton  Community  Park,  provided  a  landscape  focal 
point  for  the  installation.7 

Tradition  and  Innovation  in  Post  Design 

The  Cronkhite  Board’s  general  plan  for  the  infantry  post  at  Miraflores  Dump  called 
for  three  large  battalion  barracks  on  three  sides  of  a  square  or  trapezoid,  with  the 
administration  building  centered  on  the  fourth  side.  The  buildings  would  face 


[2.06]  Rio  Cardenas  Bridge. 


[2.07]  Native  tropical  vegetation  still  thrives  along  this  road  at  Gun  Hill. 


24 


Tropical  Flora  and  Military  Discipline 


At  least  one  plant  indigenous  to  the 
Canal  Zone  presented  a  challenge  for 
military  discipline  at  Fort  Clayton  and 
elsewhere  during  the  early  years. 
Marijuana,  or  cannabis  sativa,  grows 
wild  throughout  Panama  and  also  is 
cultivated  in  many  areas.  Because 
cultivation  and  sale  of  marijuana  was 
not  illegal  in  Panama  during  the  early 
decades  of  the  20th  century,  some 
percentage  of  soldiers  had  smoked  it 
from  the  earliest  days  of  U.S.  military 
presence  on  the  isthmus. 

Medical  and  popular  opinion  during 
the  1910s  and  1920s  largely  held  that 
the  drug  posed  no  long-term  addic¬ 
tion  problems.  Army  commanders, 
however,  repeatedly  complained  to 
their  superiors  that  marijuana  use 
made  their  troops  “incorrigible  and 
unmanageable”  when  they  were 
under  its  influence.8  By  1923  the  PCD 
Commanding  General  was  convinced 
there  might  be  some  substance  to 
these  complaints  and  issued  a  circu¬ 
lar  designating  the  use  and  posses¬ 
sion  of  marijuana  as  a  punishable 
military  offense.  The  Republic  of 
Panama,  acting  upon  U.S.  Army  pres¬ 
sure,  passed  a  law  that  year  making 
marijuana  sale  and  use  punishable 
by  a  maximum  of  1  year  in  prison. 

But  in  1926  the  Governor  of  the  Canal 
Zone  named  a  committee  to  investi¬ 
gate  the  use  of  marijuana  and  submit 
recommendations.  Based  on  one  ses¬ 
sion  observing  four  policemen  smoke 
marijuana  leaves,  this  committee 
reported  “the  influence  of  the  drug 
when  used  for  smoking  is  uncertain 
and  appears  to  have  been  greatly 
exaggerated  . . .  [T]here  is  no  medical 
evidence  that  it  causes  insanity.”9  The 


committee  concluded  there  was  no 
evidence  that  marijuana  was  a  habit¬ 
forming  drug  and  recommended 
against  preventing  its  sale  or  use.  Con¬ 
sequently,  the  military  penalties  for 
possession  and  use  were  dropped. 

In  spite  of  the  findings  of  the  gover¬ 
nor’s  board,  Army  commanders  con¬ 
tinued  to  press  for  solutions  to 
military  discipline  problems  arising 
from  the  rapidly  growing  numbers  of 
troops  smoking  marijuana.  In  1928 
the  PCD  Commander  ordered  fur¬ 
ther  study  of  the  problem.  A  year¬ 
long  study  ensued  in  which  all 
soldiers  suspected  of  marijuana 
intoxication  were  referred  to  the  PCD 
Surgeon  for  medical  investigation. 
This  study  produced  findings  similar 
to  the  1926  investigation;  once  again 
it  was  recommended  by  the  investi¬ 
gating  body  that  no  steps  be  taken  to 
restrict  its  use.  On  1  December  1930, 
however,  1  week  after  a  change  of 
command,  a  General  Order  was 
issued  forbidding  military  personnel 
from  using  marijuana.10 

But  Army  officers  continued  to  com¬ 
plain  about  the  impact  of  marijuana 
use  on  military  discipline.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  one  estimate  from  this  period, 
20  percent  of  Fort  Clayton  troops 
were  using  marijuana;  Fort  Davis 
ranked  second,  with  5  percent  of  its 
troops  involved.  So  once  again,  this 
time  in  May  1931,  the  Commanding 
General  asked  the  Governor  of  the 
Canal  Zone  (i.e.,  the  civilian  author¬ 
ity)  to  reinvestigate  the  problem  of 
marijuana  use  by  U.S.  troops.  A  new 
committee,  consisting  of  both  mili¬ 
tary  medical  personnel  and  civilian 
medical  staff  from  Gorgas  Hospital, 


was  established  to  conduct  the 
investigation.  This  effort  included 
dedicated  scientific  studies  using 
marijuana  grown  and  harvested 
under  controlled  conditions  in  the 
Panama  Canal  Experiment  Gardens 
and  observations  of  soldier  volun¬ 
teers  using  marijuana.  The  findings 
of  this  investigation  were  much 
broader  than  earlier  findings.  It  was 
concluded  that  marijuana  smoking 
was  common  among  soldiers,  but 
that  the  drug  was  not  addictive.  The 
committee  identified  no  mental  or 
physical  deterioration  attributable 
to  smoking  marijuana.  However,  it 
was  concluded  (based  on  common 
medical  knowledge  and  practice) 
that  the  habitual  use  of  any  stimu¬ 
lant  or  intoxicant  was  detrimental  to 
a  person’s  health.  Therefore,  this 
panel  recommended  keeping  the 
military  restrictions  against  mari¬ 
juana  in  force.  At  the  same  time, 
however,  the  panel  expressed  the 
opinion  that  commanders  had 
overemphasized  the  effects  of  mari¬ 
juana  in  the  creation  of  delinquent 
soldiers,  stating  that  “a  large  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  delinquents  are  morons 
and  psychopaths  which  conditions 
of  themselves  would  serve  to 
account  for  delinquency.”11 

No  further  action  was  taken  by  the 
civilian  Canal  Zone  government  to 
ban  marijuana,  and  many  soldiers 
continued  to  use  it  in  violation  of 
military  restrictions.  This  situation 
persisted  with  little  change  until 
1942,  at  which  time  the  civilian  gov¬ 
ernment  finally  outlawed  the  pro¬ 
duction  and  sale  of  marijuana  in  the 
Canal  Zone.12 


2-5 


inward  and  have  roads  in  back.  At  both  Forts  Clayton  and  Davis  the  actual  construc¬ 
tion  followed  the  board’s  recommendations,  and  initially  both  posts  were  identical. 
In  compliance  with  a  request  made  in  1919  by  the  Commanding  General  of  the 
Panama  Canal  Department,  the  construction  of  “various  little  buildings”13  was  kept 
to  a  minimum,  and  large  barracks  were  to  be  used  wherever  possible.  This 
approach  created  a  more  compact  post  with  fewer  buildings,  thereby  reducing  the 
cost  of  utility  service.  The  consolidation  of  all  administrative  functions  in  one  regi¬ 
mental  headquarters  building  was  also  recommended  as  a  cost-saving  measure.14 

The  initial  design  for  Fort  Clayton  reflected  a  combination  of  past  military  tradition, 
contemporary  trends  in  urban  planning,  and  the  prevalent  general  building  design 
used  by  the  Isthmian  Canal  Commission/The  Panama  Canal  (see  cover  photo).  The 
use  of  barracks,  officers’  quarters,  and  administrative  facilities  to  enclose  a  parade 
ground  is  reminiscent  of  a  pre-Civil  War  military  post  design  concept,  as  is  the 
prominence  of  the  parade  ground  as  the  post’s  central  feature.  It  was  after  the  Civil 
War,  when  Army  posts  were  realigned  and  consolidated,  that  the  concept  of  open- 
ended  parade  grounds  came  into  favor  in  order  to  better  accommodate  future 
expansion. 

In  Fort  Clayton’s  original  layout  military  tradition  also  was  apparent  in  the  arrange¬ 
ment  of  certain  elements  that  reflected  the  military  hierarchy.  The  headquarters 
building  was  sited  at  the  top  of  the  barracks  rectangle,  demonstrating  the  domi¬ 
nance  of  the  command  facility.  The  top  central  point  of  the  officers’  housing  area 
was  reserved  for  the  Commanding  Officer’s  quarters— the  only  single-family 
dwelling  included  in  the  original  plan.  Two-family  field  officers’  quarters  were  built 
next  door  on  both  sides.  Across  the  street  were  the  two-family  captains’  quarters. 
The  ends  of  the  street  were  occupied  by  four-family  lieutenants’  quarters.  The  hous¬ 
ing  for  noncommissioned  officers  (NCOs)  was  built  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  post. 

Several  aspects  of  Fort  Clayton’s  overall  design,  however,  reflected  more  modern 
concepts  of  land-use  planning  that  had  emerged  in  an  1890s  renovation  of  Fort 
Riley,  Kansas.  While  the  Fort  Riley  artillery  post  presented  the  traditional  quadran¬ 
gle  and  parade  field,  this  configuration  removed  the  officers’  quarters  from  the 
actual  quadrangle  and  placed  them  along  a  curving  arc  ‘on  top’  of  the  other  build¬ 
ings.  The  Fort  Riley  renovation  was  designed  by  Captain  George  E.  Pond,  with  the 
assistance  of  architect  William  Goding.  Pond  designed  an  installation  with  both  cav¬ 
alry  and  artillery  posts,  and  this  artillery  post  design  strongly  foreshadowed  layout 
concepts  used  later  at  Fort  Clayton  [2.08] .  The  Fort  Riley  artillery  post  is  largely  rec¬ 
tangular,  with  barracks  and  an  administration  building  flanking  a  parade  field.  At 
the  top  of  the  post  layout  is  a  semicircle  containing  officers’  quarters.  Very  similar 
design  elements  were  incorporated  into  the  Fort  Clayton  layout. 

The  use  of  a  curved  road  for  a  residential  area  reflected  suburban  design  ideals 
then  emerging  in  the  United  States  as  well  as  urban  planning  choices  made  for  the 
permanent  towns  that  had  recently  been  built  in  the  Canal  Zone.  The  plans  for 
those  Canal  Zone  communities  had  been  influenced  and  partially  executed  by  a 
group  of  renowned  civilian  architects  and  landscape  architects  retained  by  Colonel 
Goethals’  to  ensure  that  “U.S.  citizens  living  in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone  should  live 


2-6 


[2.08]  Proposed  plan  for  Fort  Riley,  Kansas 
(1887),  showing  similarities  between  artillery 
post  layout  and  initial  layout  of  Fort  Clayton. 


in  beautiful  communities— communities  that  would  contribute  to  the  quality  of  life 
for  their  residents.”15  The  influence  of  Colonel  Goethals’  ‘beautiful  communities’  of 
civilian  architecture  spurred  the  introduction  of  more  sophisticated  building 
designs  on  military  installations  as  well 

Tropical  Facility  Design  and  Functionality 

Adaptations  for  Excessive  Rain  and  Humidity 

In  the  1890s  the  Army  had  begun  developing  a  system  of  standardized  construction 
for  many  different  types  of  buildings,  including  administrative  facilities,  barracks, 
and  family  housing.  This  trend  toward  standardization,  which  was  intended  to  con¬ 
trol  construction  costs  and  improve  living  standards,  provided  a  route  for  incorpo¬ 
rating  improved  building  design  into  standard  construction  practice  on  Army 
installations,  including  those  located  in  the  Canal  Zone.16 

The  initial  construction  at  Fort  Clayton  was  based  on  Army-standard  building  plans, 
but  local  conditions  required  these  plans  to  be  modified  to  varying  degrees.  The 
Building  Division  of  The  Panama  Canal  engineered  the  modifications.  The  most 
pressing  problem  to  address  was  complications  created  by  the  very  high  tropical 
humidity.  Daytime  temperatures  are  usually  in  the  80s,  and  do  not  fall  below  70  at 
night.  This  temperature  range  remains  constant  throughout  the  year;  seasonality  is 
indicated  by  precipitation  patterns.  The  dry  season  in  Panama  runs  from  January 
through  April,  and  is  characterized  by  strong  sun,  clear  skies,  and  quickening 
breezes.  The  rainy  season  begins  in  May  and  runs  through  December,  during  which 
periods  of  sunshine  alternate  with  periods  of  clouds  and  rain.  It  rains  almost  every 
day  during  the  rainy  season,  and  the  rainfall  can  be  torrential.  In  general,  wood  and 
metal  were  used  mainly  as  temporary  building  materials  because  they  deteriorate 


2-7 


rapidly  due  to  the  stresses  of  heat  and  dampness.  Wood  rots  easily  and  is  vulnera¬ 
ble  to  attack  from  insects;  steel  is  subject  to  rapid  corrosion.  Concrete  proved  to  be 
the  most  practical  and  impervious  building  material  for  the  tropical  environment, 
and  it  was  used  widely  both  in  the  form  of  poured,  reinforced  concrete  and  as  con¬ 
crete  block.  It  was  recommended  as  the  preferred  building  material  by  the 
Cronkhite  Board  in  1917. 

The  buildings  at  Fort  Clayton  were  designed  to  be  “of  a  uniform  type  of  construction 
and  [to]  embody  features,  consistent  with  economy,  that  past  experience  has 
taught  the  climate  required  for  permanency  and  for  comfort.”17  The  basic  architec¬ 
tural  features  of  the  original  buildings  were  skeleton  frames  (columns  and  beams) 
of  reinforced  concrete  with  exterior  walls  of  hollow  concrete  block  stuccoed  on  the 
outside  and  lime-plastered  on  the  inside.  Roofs  were  clad  with  Spanish  tile  over 
wooden  frames.  The  first-floor  elevations  were  uniformly  4  ft  above  grade,  and  the 
buildings  typically  included  generous  porches  with  concrete  floors,  copper 
screens,  and  tile  hoods  over  otherwise  unsheltered  barracks  windows.18 

The  most  obvious  external  architectural  adaptation  to  Panama’s  frequent  torrential 
rains  was  broad,  overhanging  eaves  designed  to  keep  rain  off  the  exterior  walls  as 
much  as  possible.  Another  adaptation  was  the  red  clay  Spanish  tile  used  for  roof 
cladding.  Special  window  hoods  also  were  included  to  protect  open  windows  from 
the  rain.  In  their  most  advanced  form  these  hoods  evolved  into  a  special  type  of 
continuous  pent  roof  called  a  mediagua,  a  broad,  pitched  overhang  affixed  at  inter¬ 
mediate  floors  of  a  building  to  shelter  window  openings  below.  A  mediagua  runs 
like  a  continuous  permanent  awning  around  the  perimeter  of  the  external  wall. 

To  protect  the  building  interiors  and  contents  from  the  effects  of  excessive  humidity, 
family  housing  and  bachelor  officers’  quarters  (BOQ)  featured  dry  closets,  small 
enclosures  outfitted  with  a  light  bulb  that  burned  continuously  to  reduce  humidity, 
and  circulate  air  (by  convection),  thereby  inhibiting  the  growth  of  mildew  [2.09],  In 
barracks,  the  dry  closets  were  greatly  expanded  in  size  and  referred  to  as  “dry 
rooms.”  Without  dry  closets  and  dry  rooms,  shoes,  belts,  and  other  leather  goods 
would  be  covered  in  mold  in  an  astonishingly  short  period  of  time.  Light  bulbs  also 
were  installed  inside  pianos  to  keep  the  wooden  elements  from  warping.  Fungicide 
was  added  to  paint  in  order  to  help  keep  the  mildew  problem  in  check. 

The  management  of  water  runoff  during  the  prolonged  rainy  season  was  a  major 
consideration  in  the  layout  of  Fort  Clayton.  This  was  evident  in  the  landscape, 
which  was  veined  with  a  sophisticated  system  of  surface  drains  and  culverts  [2.10] . 
Rainwater  was  shed  directly  off  building  roofs  or  directed  through  eave  funnels 
into  narrow  concrete  surface  drains  at  building  perimeters.  From  these  drains  the 
water  quickly  flowed  into  larger  surface  drains  that  ran  between  buildings.  This 
runoff  was  in  turn  directed  into  paved  culverts  that  drained  into  the  Cardenas  River 
[2.11].  The  system  worked  beautifully  during  torrential  rains.  But  in  some  areas  the 
ground  settled,  creating  low  points  in  the  surface  drains  that  collected  standing 
water  and  created  a  breeding  environment  for  mosquitoes  and  other  pests.  Similar 
problems  arose  on  heavily  planted  lots  when  surface  drains  became  clogged  with 
plant  material. 


2-8 


[2.09]  Typical  dry  closet  heating  element  assembly. 


EiVCS  •  DWIH  ‘  FOR  *  BUIIDIHG 


[2.11]  To  prevent  ponding  in  this  often  rain- 
soaked  environment,  paved  culverts  help  direct 
runoff  down  to  the  Cardenas  River. 


[2.10]  Concrete  drain  details. 


2-9 


[2.12]  This  type  of  slatted  wall  opening  is  representative  [2.13]  M  Company,  33rd  Infantry,  in  formation  in  front  of  their  barracks.  Note  the 

of  an  architectural  detail  that  was  used  throughout  the  use  of  numerous  large  screened  windows  in  the  barracks  buildings, 

interior  spaces  of  early  post  housing  to  improve 
ventilation. 


Ventilation  Adaptations  for  Tropical  Heat 


The  other  major  environmental  consideration  in  Panama  for  facility  designers  was 
the  unrelenting  heat.  Effective  ventilation  was  essential  to  providing  livable  housing. 
Wide  porches  were  incorporated  into  the  designs  for  all  residential  units,  both  fam¬ 
ily  housing  and  barracks.  Interior  walls  often  had  slatted  overhead  openings  and 
doors  for  better  air  circulation  (at  the  expense  of  some  privacy)  [2.12].  There  were 
also  louvered  transoms  over  interior  doors. 

The  buildings  included  numerous  windows  on  all  sides  for  maximum  cross-ventila¬ 
tion  [2.13].  All  porches  and  windows  were  copper-screened  to  keep  mosquitoes 
outside,  but  before  the  advent  of  air  conditioning  porch  windows  were  not  glazed; 
the  continuous  tropical  heat  made  that  unnecessary  and  even  counterproductive. 

Adaptations  for  Resisting  Termites 

The  architecture  at  Fort  Clayton  included  interesting  features  to  combat  the  termite 
problem.  The  use  of  concrete  as  the  principal  building  material  was  the  most  obvi¬ 
ous.  Raising  the  first  floor  4  ft  above  grade  eliminated  direct  contact  with  the 
ground  (except  for  the  concrete  foundation  or  piers).  For  temporary  wood  con¬ 
struction,  metal  collars  called  insect  pans  were  installed  to  separate  the  ground 
floor  concrete  support  columns  from  the  wood  components  above.  These  metal 
pans  extended  downward  and  away  from  the  column  at  a  45-degree  angle,  posing 
a  formidable  barrier  to  marauding  termites.  The  wooden  frames  upon  which  the 
tile  roofing  was  installed  were  fabricated  of  creosote-treated  lumber.  Perhaps  the 
most  interesting  adaptation  was  the  way  outside  stairs  were  constructed;  stairs 
were  installed  separately  from  the  building  to  create  a  gap  of  several  inches  across 
the  course  of  the  stairs,  or  between  the  top  of  the  stairs  and  the  building  entry 
door  [2.14]. 


•  stair  gap 


[2.14]  Sketches  of  typical  insect  pan  and  stair 
gap. 


2-10 


The  Ever-Present  Bohio 


To  soldiers  who  served  in  Panama, 
the  humble  bohio  [2.15]  was  a  fea¬ 
ture  of  the  environment  only 
slightly  less  common  than  the  mer¬ 
ciless  sun  or  the  rivers  of  rain.  In 
simplest  terms,  a  bohio  is  a  hut— a 
structure  based  on  a  form  of  hous¬ 
ing  that  was  common  throughout 
tropical  regions  of  the  Americas 
when  Europeans  first  arrived  in  the 
late  15th  century.  Constructed  of 
readily  available  tropical  materials— 
most  notably  palm  leaves  and 
wood— bohios  are  still  a  common 
form  of  family  housing  in  disadvan¬ 
taged  rural  areas  of  Latin  America. 
In  more  urbanized  areas  an  open¬ 
sided  version  of  the  traditional 
bohio  was  adapted  for  residential 


construction  as  an  extension  or 
enhancement  of  a  patio,  erected  pri¬ 
marily  as  a  sheltered  area  for  relax¬ 
ing  or  entertaining. 

In  the  U.S.-run  Canal  Zone  and  the 
military  installations  hosted  there, 
however,  this  indigenous  form  of 
housing  was  used  as  an  inexpensive 
form  of  civil  infrastructure.  Bohios 
were  erected  in  public  spaces  to 
provide  shelter  from  the  tropical 
sun  or  downpours  for  anyone  who 
happened  to  be  in  the  vicinity.  Some 
contemporary  bohios  on  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton,  like  their  traditional  counter¬ 
parts  elsewhere,  were  made  of  poles 
(usually  tree  trunks)  with  a  roof  of 
thatched  palm  fronds  that  was 


vented  at  the  apex.  As  might  be 
expected,  though,  the  Army  modi¬ 
fied  the  traditional  design  to  create  a 
bohio  that  was  truly  built  to  last 
This  modern-style  bohio  was  an 
open-sided  structure  consisting  of 
masonry  uprights  on  a  concrete 
floor,  supporting  a  Spanish-style 
clay  tile  roof.  In  terms  of  appearance 
and  construction  this  type  of  bohio 
fit  well  with  the  tropical  style  of 
architecture  that  was  so  prevalent 
on  Fort  Clayton,  and  there  is  no 
doubt  about  its  durability.  But  its 
materials  absorbed  and  stored  solar 
heat,  making  it  a  less  effective  place 
than  the  traditional  thatched  ver¬ 
sion  to  escape  the  brutal  heat. 


[2.15]  Traditional 
(foreground)  and 
modern-style  bohios  in 
front  of  Building  518. 


2-11 


[2.16]  Wooden  Canal  Zone  building  sealed  with 
gas-tight  tarpaulins  and  ready  for  fumigation 
with  methyl  bromide,  which  penetrates  lumber 
and  kills  drywood  termite  colonies. 


Even  with  these  architectural  and  materials  adaptations,  wood  structures  still 
needed  to  be  fumigated  regularly  to  control  tropical  insects  [2.16]. 

The  Construction  Program 

Funding  and  Tasking 

Funds  for  the  construction  of  Fort  Clayton  were  provided  under  the  Appropriation 
Act  of  3  March  1919.  The  $3.99  million  appropriation  provided  for  “the  construction 
of  barracks,  quarters,  and  other  necessary  buildings  for  the  accommodation  of  two 
regiments  of  Infantry,  including  water  and  sewer  systems,  roads,  walks,  and  so 
forth.”19  Forts  Clayton  and  Davis  were  to  be  identically  constructed,  and  each  would 
house  one  infantry  regiment.  The  Secretary  of  War  allotted  funding  for  the  project  to 
the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  on  23  April  1919.  The  appropriation  was  then 
divided  among  the  necessary  divisions  of  the  agency.  The  Building  Division  was 
allocated  $2.85  million;  the  Electrical  Division  was  given  $212,000;  and  the  Munici¬ 
pal  Division  received  $842,000.  An  unexpended  balance  of  about  $81,000  was 
retained.20 

The  War  Department’s  first  choice  for  constructing  Fort  Clayton  was  The  Panama 
Canal  due  to  the  expertise  and  large  labor  force  gained  during  construction  of  the 
canal  and  its  myriad  associated  buildings  and  structures.  The  Building  Division  of 
the  Department  of  Operation  and  Maintenance  had  previously  carried  out  all  new 
construction  for  the  Army  and  the  Navy  fortifications  in  the  Canal  Zone.21 

In  1917  the  design  group  of  The  Panama  Canal’s  Building  Division  was  tasked  to  pro¬ 
vide  plans  and  estimates  for  the  two  permanent  infantry  posts.  As  part  of  this  effort 


2-12 


the  Section  of  Surveys  accomplished  a  topographical  survey  of  the  Miraflores 
Dump  area  to  assist  in  the  development  of  estimates.  By  the  end  of  1920,  the  Office 
Engineer’s  Section  had  produced  plans  for  a  complete  set  of  buildings  at  Forts  Clay¬ 
ton  and  Davis,  including  officers’  quarters,  barracks,  stables,  waste  incinerator,  and 
headquarters  building.22 

The  Building  Division  had  no  large  building  projects  underway  for  the  canal  at  this 
time,  so  it  could  devote  most  of  its  attention  to  the  construction  of  Forts  Clayton  and 
Davis.  By  28  March  1919,  plans  and  estimates  were  far  enough  along  for  the  Gover¬ 
nor  of  The  Panama  Canal  to  advise  the  chief  of  office  that  the  canal  “has  organiza¬ 
tion  and  equipment  to  commence  work  within  two  weeks  after  location  is  approved 
and  can  carry  out  project  by  July  1,  1920.”23  The  military  authorities  formally 
approved  the  project  as  planned  on  19  May  1919,  and  work  at  Miraflores  began  the 
next  day.  Mr.  Samuel  M.  Hitt,  who  designed  the  Gorgas  Hospital  buildings,  served  as 
the  main  architect  for  the  project,  and  Mr.  A.  Hall  was  named  supervisor  in  charge 
of  construction  at  the  Fort  Clayton  site.24 

The  initial  work  was  a  job  for  the  Municipal  Division,  which  was  primarily  responsi¬ 
ble  for  grading  and  for  the  construction  of  roads,  walks,  sewers,  and  water  lines.  By 
the  end  of  June  about  $79,000  had  been  spent  on  the  Fort  Clayton  project  for  pre¬ 
liminary  surveys,  mapping,  grading,  and  the  partial  installation  of  cast  iron  water 
and  sewer  pipes.  The  Electrical  Division  installed  2200  volt  feeder  equipment  at 
Miraflores  substation,  near  the  locks.  The  original  electrical  service  on  post-the  25- 
cycle  Canal  Zone  standard— would  be  distributed  via  underground  cables.25  From 
the  beginning  The  Panama  Canal  built  both  civilian  towns  and  military  posts  with 
underground  utilities.  This  approach  may  have  been  dictated  by  the  heavy  rains  or 
the  vulnerability  of  wooden  utility  poles  to  attack  by  termites.  It  also  may  reflect  an 
aesthetic  choice,  as  the  Isthmian  Canal  Commission  and  Colonel  Goethels  made  a 
conscious  effort  to  design  aesthetic  appeal  into  Canal  Zone  construction. 

Obstacles  to  Construction 

Unexpected  difficulties  in  acquiring  the  necessary  laborers  and  construction  mate¬ 
rials  caused  construction  delays  at  Fort  Clayton.  A  clause  in  the  appropriation  act 
through  which  the  construction  was  funded  stipulated  that  the  Governor  of  The 
Panama  Canal  purchase  materials,  supplies,  and  equipment  from  War  Department 
surplus  stocks.  Although  The  Panama  Canal  had  requisitioned  materials  such  as 
roof  tile,  hardware,  plumbing  fixtures,  millwork,  and  lumber  by  23  June  1919,  ship¬ 
ments  arrived  an  average  of  2  months  after  the  promised  delivery  date.  Also,  sup¬ 
plies  that  had  been  contracted  were  not  available  through  surplus  stocks.  In  such 
cases  it  was  necessary  to  buy  the  materials  from  private-sector  manufacturers.  This 
approach  presented  its  own  obstacles  because  another  clause  in  the  appropria¬ 
tions  act  prohibited  the  purchase  of  materials  from  private  manufacturers  if  the 
price  was  more  than  25  percent  over  the  cost  of  manufacture  by  the  government. 
World  War  I  requirements  had  pushed  up  the  cost  of  goods  and  services,  so  this 
cost  criterion  was  hard  to  meet;  the  result  was  further  construction  delays  while 
waiting  for  the  materials  ordered  to  become  available  through  government 
stocks.26 


2-13 


Similar  problems  with  acquiring  skilled  tradesmen  caused  additional  delays.  As 
with  materials,  delays  of  at  least  2  months  between  requisition  and  arrival  of  trades¬ 
men  were  the  rule.  Consequently,  construction  crews  were  short  of  carpenters, 
plasterers,  plumbers,  painters,  bricklayers,  and  sheet-metal  workers.  The  problem 
was  that  pay  rates  in  the  Canal  Zone  did  not  reflect  the  rising  wages  in  the  United 
States  in  a  timely  manner;  authorized  wage  increases  for  The  Panama  Canal  were 
often  several  months  behind.  Other  causes  of  delays  in  construction  included  prob¬ 
lems  transporting  materials  to  shipping  ports,  congestion  in  U.S.  harbors,  and  ship¬ 
ping  delays  related  to  stateside  labor  difficulties.27 

As  a  result  of  these  delays,  The  Panama  Canal  was  unable  to  finish  either  infantry 
post  by  the  promised  date  of  1  July  1920.  Most  Fort  Clayton  buildings  were  com¬ 
pleted,  except  the  headquarters  (85  percent)  and  two  battalion  barracks  (one  85 
percent,  the  other  70  percent).  All  buildings  were  constructed  as  designed.  The 
Building  Division  had  spent  about  $1.3  million  of  its  total  allotment  by  that  date. 

Panama  Canal  officials  expected  to  complete  the  last  three  buildings  by  the  end  of 
August  1920.  The  Municipal  Division  had  spent  about  $355,000  of  its  allotment  and 
work  was  95  percent  complete.  In  addition  to  grading,  excavations,  roads,  and  sani¬ 
tary  lines,  the  Municipal  Division  had  built  sidewalks,  storm  sewers  and  drains, 
curbs,  gutters,  and  culverts,  including  one  installed  under  the  Cardenas  River 
Bridge.  The  Electrical  Division  had  installed  street  lighting,  feeder  cable,  under¬ 
ground  duct  lines,  transformer  houses,  and  transformers,  among  other  items.28 

By  the  end  of  August  1920,  as  promised  in  the  revised  work  schedule,  the  first  phase 
of  construction  was  finally  completed  at  a  cost  of  about  $3.96  million.  Due  to  a  legal 
limitation  on  housing  costs,  however,  construction  of  commander’s  quarters  at 
Forts  Clayton  and  Davis  was  deferred  until  1922.  Fort  Clayton  was  officially  declared 
available  for  occupancy  on  16  September  1920.29 

The  Infantry  Moves  In 

The  33rd  Infantry  took  possession  of  Fort  Clayton  on  25  October  1920  [2.17] .  In  Octo¬ 
ber  1920  the  33rd  Infantry  was  combined  with  the  14th  and  42nd  Infantries  to  form  a 

new  brigade.  (As  part  of  a  February  1921  reorganization  the  42nd  Infantry  was  reas-  [2.17]  Fort  Clayton  with  the  Panama  Canal  in 

the  background. 


signed  to  another  unit.)  Then,  on  19  March  1921  this  new  infantry  unit  was  desig¬ 
nated  the  19th  Infantry  Brigade,  and  on  3  July  1921  this  brigade  became  part  of  the 
newly  formed  Panama  Canal  Division.  The  principal  mission  of  the  19th  Infantry 
Brigade  was  to  protect  the  Miraflores  and  Pedro  Miguel  locks  of  the  Panama  Canal 
against  hostile  land  forces 30 


The  First  36  Buildings 


The  first  facilities  built  at  Fort  Clayton  were  located  in  the  southeastern  corner  of  the 
installation’s  boundary  on  the  northwestern  end  of  the  Curundu  reservation  [2.18]. 

The  site  was  bounded  on  the  south  by  the  Cardenas  River  and  on  the  west  by  the 
Panama  Railroad.  The  central  element  of  the  overall  installation  plan  was  the  cluster 
of  three  battalion  barracks  and  the  headquarters  building  forming  a  quadrangle 
around  a  parade  ground.  Directly  northeast,  a  semicircular  road  traced  out  a  flat¬ 
tened  arch  over  the  top  of  the  quadrangle.  Two-story  officer  housing  units  lined 
both  sides  of  this  road.  Further  northeast  was  a  large  open  area  called  Miller  Field, 
which  was  used  for  recreation  and  athletic  events.  Stretching  away  to  the  north  of 
the  quadrangle  area  were  the  firing  ranges.  To  the  northwest  of  the  quadrangle  (and 
running  along  an  east-west  axis)  was  a  sod  landing  field  with  a  hangar  at  the  west¬ 
ern  end.  On  the  canal  side  of  the  westernmost  battalion  barracks  stretched  a  line  of 

buildings  that  provided  NCO  housing  and  a  special  barracks.  To  the  south  of  the  [2.18]  Map  of  the  first  buildings  to  be 

constructed  at  Fort  Clayton. 


MAP  OF  FOKT  CLAYTON  ,B  .3.  * 

So a la  1"  to  8600* 

QTS.1,9,10,11,18,19-4  Family  Lieute.Set. 
QTS.  2,3,4,6 ,7,-2  Family  Field  OfficerB  Set. 
QTS.8,12,13 ,14,15,16,17-2  Family  Oapts. Set. 
QTS.B-Cornmanding  Officers  Set. 

GTS. 20-6  Bachelor  Set, 

GTS. 25, 26  ,27,28,30 ,31-4  Family  N.C.O.Set. 
BLDG.2l-Head<iuarterB. 

BLDG.22-Batallion  Barracks. 

BLDG. 23-Bat Alii on  Barracks. 

BLDG. 24-Batallion  Barracks. 

BLDG. 29- Special  Batallion  Barracks. 

BLDGS .31,32,33 ,34 , 357  Stable 8 . 

BLDG. 36 -Incinerator. 

BLDG. 37 -Storehouse. 

BLDG. 38 -P. 5. Photo .4  Shoe  Shop. 

BLDGi 39-Garage  (24  cars) 

BLDG. 40-5.  &  fi.Schoolhouse. 

BLDG. 41 -Wagon  Shed. 


BLDGS.42,43,44-Pioket  Lines. 
BLDG.45-3ah-electric  Station. 
BLDG. 46 -Magazine. 

BLDG, 47 -Flagpole. 

BLDG. 48 -Grandstand.  (Hot  shown) 
BLDG. 49-Bleachers.  (Not  shown) 
BLDG. 60-Eigging  Shed. 
BLDG.Sl-Blaohsmith  and  Wood  Shop. 


Panama  Railroad 


2-15 


quadrangle  area  were  the  stables  and  assorted  industrial  buildings.  Gaillard  High¬ 
way,  the  main  road  from  Corozal  to  Pedro  Miguel,  ran  through  Fort  Clayton  between 
the  line  of  housing  and  special  barracks  and  the  westernmost  battalion  barracks. 

Upon  completion  of  the  initial  construction  in  1920,  36  buildings  were  in  place  at 
Fort  Clayton.  Their  appropriation  allotments  and  descriptions  are  as  follows:31 

$  105,000 
126,000 
132,000 
35,000 
111,000 
598,000 
102,000 
97,000 
30,750 
6,750 
4,375 
5,800 
20,000 

Residential  Buildings 

The  Two-Family  Field  Officers’ Quarters  (Buildings  2, 3, 4,  6,  7) 

These  were  two-story  buildings  with  one  apartment  on  each  floor  [2.19].  The  overall 
dimensions  of  the  building  (the  allotment  to  each  family)  were  40  x  55  ft.  The  space 
was  subdivided  into  a  7.5  x  22  ft  porch;  a  combined  living  and  dining  room,  parti¬ 
tioned  by  a  columned  opening,  measuring  16.7  x  30  ft;  a  kitchen  and  pantry;  three 
bedrooms  (each  with  a  dry  closet);  and  two  toilet  rooms— one  containing  tub  and 
separate  shower,  the  other  shower  only.  At  the  rear  of  the  building  was  a  one-story 
servants’  quarters  and  laundry  wing. 


5  field  officers’  quarters  (two-family) 

7  captains’  quarters  (two-family) 

6  lieutenants’  quarters  (four-family) 

1  lieutenants’  bachelor  quarters  (6-set) 
6  NCO  quarters  (four-family) 

3  battalion  barracks 
1  special  barracks 

1  headquarters  building 

2  stables  (62-stall) 

1  stable  (54-stall) 

1  stable  (35-stall) 

1  wagon  shed 
1  waste  incinerator 


The  Two-Family  Captains’ Quarters  (Buildings  8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17) 

This  building  type  was  virtually  identical  to  the  two-family  field  officers’  quarters  except 
it  also  included  a  3.5  ft  projecting  hood  sheltering  the  first-story  windows  [2.20] . 


[2.19]  Two-family  field  officers'  and  captains’ 
quarters. 


2-16 


The  Four-Family  Lieutenants’ Quarters  (Buildings  1,9, 10, 11, 18, 19) 

These  were  36  x  90  ft  rectangular  two-story  building  with  two  apartments  on  each 
floor  [2.21],  Each  apartment  had  a  porch  8.1  x  40  ft  and  a  combined  living  and  din¬ 
ing  room  similar  to  those  in  the  field  officers’  quarters  described  above,  but  measur¬ 
ing  13.75  x  26.5  ft.  Except  for  the  pantry  and  the  separate  shower  and  bath,  these 
apartments  contained  the  same  rooms  (but  smaller)  and  closets  as  the  two-set  field 
officers’  and  captains’  quarters.  In  the  rear  of  the  apartment  building,  as  a  separate 
structure,  was  an  11  x  26  ft  servants’  quarters  containing  two  rooms  for  the  four  ser¬ 
vants  plus  and  toilet  and  shower  bath.  The  laundry  tubs  for  these  lieutenants’  quar¬ 
ters  were  installed  in  the  kitchens. 

[2.21]  Four-family  lieutenants’  quarters. 


[2.20]  Exterior  of  duplex  officers’  quarters 
showing  several  defining  aspects  of  military  con- 
struction  in  Panama.  Decorative  pilasters 
appeared  on  all  the  original  barracks  and  quar¬ 
ters,  and  served  as  a  unifying  architectural  ele¬ 
ment  for  the  post. 


2-17 


[2.22]  Postcard  view  of  Quarters  1-20;  alley 
view  showing  servants'  quarters. 


In  all  of  the  officers’  quarters  described  here  and  above,  servants  were  housed  two 
to  a  room  [2.22].  The  colonel  was  allowed  four  servants;  field  officers  and  captains 
were  allowed  two  servants,  and  lieutenants  had  one  servant. 

The  6-Set  Lieutenants*  Quarters  (Building  20) 

This  was  a  two-story  structure  containing  apartments  for  six  bachelor  lieutenants  and 
one  inspector  [2.23,  2.24].  Each  apartment  extended  the  depth  of  the  building  and 
consisted  of  a  front  porch,  living  room,  bedroom,  and  private  bath.  The  building 
included  a  shared  library,  a  combined  living  and  dining  room,  kitchen,  and  pantry. 
There  was  also  a  rear  wing  containing  two  servants’  rooms  with  toilet  and  shower. 

All  of  the  original  officers7  quarters  were  converted  to 
NCO  quarters  in  1981.  They  continued  to  serve  this  purpose 
until  Fort  Clayton  closed.  The  buildings  underwent 
rehabilitation  in  the  early  1950s  with  new  baths, 
kitchens,  doors,  and  windows.  At  that  time,  new  adjustable 


[2.23]  Six-set  lieutenants'  quarters. 


2-18 


[2.24]  Exterior  appearance  of  Building  20.  Note 

aluminum  jalousie*  windows  were  installed.  These  were  the  Greek  Revival  stylistic  decoration  that 

n  j  -.mo  m  n  ,  -  appeared  on  all  of  the  larger  quarters  and  bar- 

replaced  between  1976  and  1978  with  smaller  single-hung  ,  . 

racks  in  the  initial  construction  period. 

windows,  and  the  openings  filled  in  with  plastered  terra 
cotta  blocks.  Patios  and  balconies,  accessible  by  new 
sliding  glass  doors,  were  added  to  the  quarters  in  1980. 

Central  air  conditioning  was  installed  in  1986  and  the 
Spanish  tile  roofing  materials  were  replaced  with  metal  in 
1990.  Carports  for  these  quarters  were  built  in  1932,  and  a 
few  more  were  added  in  1957.  All  carports  were  replaced  in 
1978  and  1979.  Building  20,  the  6-set  lieutenants' 
quarters,  was  remodeled  in  1958  for  use  as  four-family  NCO 
quarters.  At  that  time  all  remaining  awnings  and  mediaguas 
were  removed,  as  was  the  front  porch.  Wood  louvered 
windows  were  replaced  with  adjustable  aluminum  jalousies. 

A  laundry  shed  was  added  to  the  separate  servants' 
quarters  for  the  four-family  lieutenants'  quarters 
sometime  before  1959,  at  which  time  the  buildings  were 
upgraded  with  new  doors,  windows,  roof,  and  bath  fixtures. 

These  quarters  were  rehabilitated  again  in  1978. 

*  Over  the  years  most  of  the  jalousies  installed  on  Canal  Zone  military  housing  had  opaque  louvers,  made  either  of  wood  or  alu¬ 
minum.  Glass  louvers  were  sometimes  used,  but  they  were  fairly  uncommon  in  earlier  construction  due  to  the  expense  of 
installing  and  maintaining  them. 

1  The  term  “single-hung"  refers  to  a  window  with  one  operating  sash  that  slides  past  a  stationary  sash. 


2-19 


[2.25]  Four-family  NCO  quarters. 


The  Four-Family  NCO  Quarters  (Buildings 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31 ) 

These  were  rectangular  two-story  buildings,  30.5  x  75.6  ft,  with  two  apartments  on 
each  floor  [2.25].  Each  apartment  had  a  7  x  32  ft  porch,  a  14  x  24  ft  combined  living 
and  dining  room,  a  kitchen  (including  laundry  tubs),  two  bedrooms,  a  toilet  and 
bathroom,  and  one  dry  closet. 

The  original  NCO  housing  retained  this  use  until  Fort 
Clayton  closed.  During  the  late  1920s  the  33rd  Infantry 
Band  lived  and  rehearsed  in  Building  30.  The  buildings 
were  renumbered  (802,  803,  805,  807,  814-15)  in  1959  in 
conjunction  with  a  major  housing  construction  project,  and 
were  rehabilitated  in  1952  with  new  kitchens,  baths, 
doors,  and  adjustable  aluminum  jalousie  windows.  These 
jalousies  were  replaced  with  glass  sliding  windows  in 
1977,  and  again  in  1987  with  single-hung  aluminum  frame 
windows.  As  the  newest  windows  were  smaller  than  the 
previous  ones,  the  window  openings  had  to  be  reduced  in 
size  by  partially  filling  them  with  concrete  blocks. 

Central  air  conditioning  was  installed  in  1988.  Carports 
were  provided  in  1958.  Wood  latticed  laundry  sheds  built 
in  1949  were  spaced  in  between  some  of  the  quarters.  They 
were  replaced  in  1973  with  concrete  block  structures. 

Battalion  Barracks  (Buildings 22, 23, 24)  and  Special  Barracks  (Building  29) 

The  battalion  barracks  faced  inward  on  three  sides  of  a  hollow  square,  with  the 
fourth  side  being  occupied  by  the  headquarters  building  [2.26],  Each  battalion  bar¬ 
racks  building  was  three  stories  high  and  built  of  uniform  bays  12  ft  wide  from  cen¬ 
ter  to  center  of  columns  on  the  front  elevation.  Each  barracks  building  was  480  ft 
long  and  44  ft  deep  to  accommodate  four  companies.  Lengthwise  they  were 
divided  into  four  equal  parts  by  concrete  block  walls,  completely  separating  each 
company.  (This  partitioning  scheme  proved  inadequate  over  time  because  it  pre- 


2-20 


vented  adequate  cross-ventilation,  which  was  an  unacceptable  design  flaw  before 
air  conditioning  was  available.) 

Behind  each  company  section  was  a  wing  36  ft  wide  (3  bays)  and  projecting  33  ft.  A 
9  ft  wide  porch  extended  the  entire  length  of  the  building  on  all  floors.  One  row  of 
columns  midway  between  the  porch  and  rear  wall  of  the  building  proper  divided 
each  company’s  area  into  20  units  of  12  x  17.5  ft  each  (including  exterior  walls  and 
partitions),  arranged  two  units  deep. 

The  first  floor  of  each  company’s  section  was  partitioned  as  follows:  mess  hall,  day- 
room,  general  stores,  office,  first  sergeant,  mess  and  supply  sergeant,  tailor,  barber, 
and  pantry  [2.27].  (The  tailors  made  uniforms  for  each  man  when  he  arrived  on 
post.)  On  the  first  floor  the  rear  wing  was  partitioned  into  a  21.5  x  35.5  ft  kitchen 
storeroom  and  a  cook’s  room.  The  second-  and  third-floor  plans  of  both  the  main 
building  and  the  rear  wing  were  the  same.  All  but  two  of  the  20  units,  which  were 
partitioned  into  two  noncommissioned  officer  rooms,  formed  a  squad  room  that 
extends  10  ft  into  the  rear  wing.  The  squad  room  was  designed  to  accommodate  70 
soldiers,  allotting  57  sq  ft  per  man.  At  the  end  of  the  rear  wing  on  each  upper  floor 


[2.26]  Battalion  Barracks. 


[2.27]  E  Company  day  room. 


2-21 


[2.28]  Special  Barracks. 


was  the  toilet  and  washroom;  fixtures  were  provided  in  the  ratio  of  one  toilet  per  10 
men,  one  wash  basin  per  5  men,  one  shower  head  per  10  men,  one  laundry  tub  per 
20  men,  and  1  foot  of  urinal  trough  per  5  men. 

The  special  barracks  (Building  29)  was  the  same  design  as  the  battalion  barracks, 
but  only  two  stories  high  instead  of  three  [2.28] .  The  width  of  the  special  barracks 
was  the  same  as  the  battalion  barracks;  12  ft  bays  behind  the  continuous  porch 
formed  units  of  the  same  size  and  arrangement  found  in  the  battalion  barracks. 
However,  the  special  barracks  had  no  rear  wings.  The  total  length  of  the  building 
was  33  bays  (396  ft)  which  were  divided  by  concrete  block  cross  walls.  On  the  first 
floor  the  cross  walls  subdivided  the  33  bays  of  the  building  into  sections  from  left  to 
right  as  follows:  headquarters  company,  magazine,  ordnance  store  and  repair  shop, 
machine-gun  company,  and  supply  company.  There  was  a  flight  of  stairs  at  each 
end  of  the  common  porch  and  a  third  flight  in  the  center. 

The  battalion  barracks  and  special  barracks  remained  in 
place  and  underwent  little  change  until  they  were 
demolished  in  the  fall  of  1957  as  part  of  the  training  pro¬ 
gram  for  engineers.  The  area  was  soon  rebuilt  as  the  site 
of  NCO  quarters.32 

Administrative  Facilities-The  Headquarters  Building  (Building  21) 

Building  21  harmonized  in  design  with  the  general  scheme  of  the  barracks— a  con¬ 
tinuous  two-story  porch  on  the  front  with  a  column  spacing  of  12  ft  [2.29].  This 
building  was  28  bays  (336  ft)  long  but  7  ft  wider  than  the  barracks  (51  ft).  Unlike  the 
battalion  barracks,  Building  21  had  no  rear  wings.  A  row  of  columns  down  the  cen¬ 
ter  of  the  building  behind  the  porch  laid  out  the  same  unit  scheme  as  the  barracks, 
but  they  measured  12  x  20.25  ft  (including  exterior  walls  and  partitions).  The  front 
porch  was  10.5  ft  wide,  making  it  wider  than  the  barracks  porch. 

The  first  floor  of  Building  21  was  partitioned  as  follows:  post  exchange  (PX),  stock 
room,  lunch  room,  prison,  guardroom,  kitchen,  prison  bathroom,  sergeant  (and 
guardroom)  toilet,  officer  toilet  (off  the  guardroom),  barber,  shoemaker,  tailor, 


2-22 


pantry,  office  (for  PX),  and  PX  toilet.  The  remaining  units  were  used  as  an  infirmary, 
which  comprised  a  12-bed  ward,  mess,  kitchen,  ward  bathroom,  ward  attendant, 
dispensary,  surgeon,  assistant  surgeon,  dressing  room,  waiting  room,  dentist,  linen 
stores,  and  medical  stores  (and  private  toilet). 

Space  on  the  second  floor  was  allotted  as  follows:  auditorium,  including  stage  and 
dressing  rooms,  measuring  39  ft  wide  in  the  clear  by  120  ft  long  to  the  front  of  the 
stage;  26-bed  personnel  dormitory,  court-martial,  commandant,  adjutant,  field  offi¬ 
cer,  field  clerks,  quartermaster  clerk,  quartermaster,  supply  officer,  adjutant’s 
sergeant,  summary  court,  noncommissioned  room  (off  the  personnel  dormitory), 
personnel  dormitory  bath,  mailing  room,  court-martial  waiting  room,  printing  room, 
and  officers’  toilet  [2.30]. 

In  1946  the  second  floor  became  home  to  an  administrative 
school  to  train  clerical  personnel.  The  PX  continued  oper¬ 
ating  on  the  first  floor  along  with  several  concessions,  and 
Post  Headquarters  also  remained  there.  In  the  early  1960s 
the  building  was  demolished,  and  officer  housing  was 
erected  on  the  site  in  1965. 33 


[2.30]  Post  Exchange  in  Building  21,  Headquar¬ 
ters  Building. 


2-23 


Operations  and  Support  Facilities 

83rd  Infantry  Stable  Area 

In  addition  to  the  headquarters  building,  barracks  and  housing  a  number  of  other 
buildings  and  facilities  were  constructed  to  support  the  mission  of  the  33rd  Infantry. 
The  primary  means  of  transportation  for  the  infantry  was  by  horse  or  mule,  so  most 
of  the  original  support  facilities  were  stables.  Located  south  of  the  quadrangle,  the 
stable  area  was  in  the  section  of  Fort  Clayton  that  would  later  occupy  the  850  to  867 
housing  area. 

All  of  the  horse  and  mule  stables  were  built  on  a  concrete  foundation  with  concrete 
floors,  wood  and  screen  walls,  and  galvanized  iron  roofs.34  These  rectangular  build¬ 
ings  (27  ft  wide  by  125-256  ft  long)  each  contained  two  rows  of  facing  stalls  divided 
by  a  4  ft  wide  central  passage.  The  buildings  were  equipped  with  electricity,  water, 
and  sewer  connections.  In  addition  to  the  animal  stalls  the  stables  contained  a  sad¬ 
dle  room,  a  squad  room,  office  space,  and  latrines. 

All  of  the  buildings  in  the  33rd  Infantry  stable  area  were 
demolished  between  May  1953  and  September  1961. 

The  Quartermaster  Office  and  Warehouse  (Building 37) 

This  facility  measured  110  x  46.5  ft  [2.31],  Constructed  on  a  wood  foundation  with 
wood  floors  and  walls,  the  building  was  roofed  with  galvanized  iron.  A  porch  ran 
the  entire  length  of  the  building. 


The  building  underwent  minor  alterations  in  1928  (to  serve 
as  a  store  house)  and  again  in  1933  (to  function  as  a  PX 
lunch  room  with  a  "refreshment  garden") .  During  its  final 
incarnation  in  1935,  the  building  was  converted  to  the 
post  tailor  and  cobbler  shop,  including  a  hat  shop,  store¬ 
room,  dressing  room,  cutting  room,  tailor  shop,  and 


[2.31]  Building  37,  Quartermaster  Office  and 
Warehouse. 


2-24 


cobbler  shop.  Building  37  was  demolished  sometime  around 
1956. 

Utilities  Shop  (Building 54)  and  Miscellaneous  Small  Buildings 

Building  54  was  rather  small,  measuring  38  x  62  ft  [2.32].  It  originally  housed  a 
plumbing  shop,  electrical  shop,  paint  shop,  and  carpentry  shop.  After  alterations  in 
1936,  the  entire  floor  space  was  used  for  a  carpentry  shop. 

Other  related  minor  buildings  that  were  turned  over  to  the  33rd  Infantry  in  1920 
included  the  wagon  shed  and  firehouse  (Building  41),  which  accommodated  26 
vehicles,  and  eight  transformer  houses.  The  transformer  houses  measured  14  x  18 
ft,  and  with  their  characteristic  stuccoed  concrete,  tile  block  walls  and  tile  roofs, 
they  resembled  miniature  housing  units.  A  smaller  version  of  this  transformer 
house  measuring  6.25  x  6.25  x  12  ft  became  ubiquitous  throughout  the  Canal  Zone. 
They  were  built  on  military  installations  as  well  as  civilian  housing  areas  and  com¬ 
mercial  districts  [2.33]. 


[2.32]  Building  54,  Utilities  Shop  and  Tool 
Room. 


[2.33]  A  typical  transformer  house  constructed 
in  1920. 


2-25 


Solid  Waste  Incinerator 


The  incinerator,  designed  to  treat  the  refuse  of  one  brigade,  was  completed  and  put 
into  operation  on  9  December  1920.  Less  than  3  months  later  repair  costs  to  the  facil¬ 
ity  had  exceeded  $250  and  a  written  complaint  was  registered  by  the  Panama  Canal 
Department’s  Office  of  the  Quartermaster  to  the  Chief  Engineer  of  The  Panama 
Canal,  the  agency  responsible  for  its  design  and  construction.  The  Office  of  the  Quar¬ 
termaster  believed  the  problem  was  due  to  faulty  construction,  poor  engineering  or 
poor  materials.’’35  The  Panama  Canal’s  Department  of  Operation  and  Maintenance, 
after  completing  an  inspection  of  the  facility,  determined  that  the  problem  was  due 
to  the  fact  that,  shortly  after  completion,  the  facility  was  put  into  continuous  opera¬ 
tion  until  February  1921,  when  one  of  the  arches  in  unit  No.  2  had  to  be  replaced.36 
The  Department  of  Operation  and  Maintenance  concluded  that  the  failure  of  the 
facility  was  due  to  one  of  several  factors  related  to  incinerator  operation  rather  than 
poor  design  or  construction  by  The  Panama  Canal.  There  is  no  record  of  how  this 
issue  was  resolved,  but  it  would  not  be  the  last  time  the  Panama  Canal  Department 
was  dissatisfied  with  construction  work  by  The  Panama  Canal. 

Completion  of  Original  Infantry  Post  Construction 

In  1922  animal  stables,  an  educational  facility,  a  powder  magazine,  and  comman¬ 
der’s  quarters  were  constructed  at  Fort  Clayton. 

Additional  Operations  and  Support  Facilities 

The  1922  stable  accommodated  48  animals  and  was  similar  in  design  to  the  stables 
constructed  2  years  earlier.  Building  46,  a  small  arms  powder  magazine,  was  com¬ 
pleted  in  June  1922.  This  14  x  20  ft  building  was  constructed  of  concrete  block  walls, 
concrete  flooring,  and  covered  with  a  roof  of  galvanized  iron  and  concrete. 

Building  46  was  converted  to  a  storage  shed  in  1965,  and 
was  finally  demolished  in  1993. 


The  educational  facility,  Building  40  was  called  an  “athletic  recreation  school  build- 
ing  [2.34]. 3  It  was  located  near  the  stables  and  most  likely  was  used  as  a  training 
center  for  soldiers  rather  than  a  schoolhouse  for 
children. 

The  educational  mission  of  this  build¬ 
ing  lasted  only  5  years;  by  1927  it 
was  being  used  as  an  officers'  club. 

This  utilization  lasted  only  2  years 
because,  in  the  words  of  the  33rd 
Infantry  Commanding  Officer,  it  was 
"totally  unsuitable  and  poorly 
located  in  the  vicinity  of  the  stable 
area."38  In  1929  the  facility  was  con¬ 
verted  into  a  guardhouse  with  cells, 
rooms  for  the  Officer  of  Guard  and  the 


[2.34]  Building  40,  Guard  House. 


2-26 


Prison  Officer,  an  NCO  office,  and 
latrines.  The  building  was 
finally  demolished  in  1941. 


The  Commander’s  Residence 

The  final  element  of  the  post  was  the  com¬ 
mander’s  quarters  [2.35].  Construction  of 
this  building  proved  to  be  problematic 
because  its  projected  cost  exceeded  a  legal 
maximum  set  in  the  appropriation.  Construc¬ 
tion  was  delayed  in  hopes  labor  and  material 
costs  could  be  reduced.  But  unable  to  find 
extra  funds  and  unwilling  to  let  the  appropri¬ 
ated  money  expire,  construction  finally 
began  on  13  March  1922.  In  order  to  stay 
within  the  spending  limit,  plans  for  the  build¬ 
ing  were  revised.  Instead  of  the  original  two- 
story  plan,  the  structure  was  scaled  back  to 
one  story.  Wood  floors  were  omitted  in  most 
living  areas  and  the  quality  and  amount  of 
trim  was  reduced.  Planned  double  interior 
doors  were  eliminated  and  replaced  with 
standard-size  doors  and  windows.39 

The  commander’s  quarters  was  the  only  sin¬ 
gle-family  housing  unit  on  post  when  it  was 
constructed.  The  one-story  building  was 
raised  3  ft  above  grade  on  concrete  piers. 

The  main  building  measured  64  x  60  ft  but 
included  two  rear-projecting  wings  each  30  x 
16  ft  in  length  [2.36] .  As  with  the  other  quar¬ 
ters,  concrete  was  used  for  walls  and  floors. 

The  roof  was  originally  clad  with  asphalt 
shingles.  The  main  building  was  constructed 
with  a  verandah  12  ft  wide  at  the  front  door 
and  8  ft  wide  along  the  sides  and  rear.  Two 

living  rooms  stretched  down  the  center  of  the  house  and  led  into  a  hallway  from 
which  the  wings  were  accessed.  Flanking  the  living  rooms  on  both  sides  were  four 
corner  bedrooms;  a  short  hallway  connected  the  front  bedroom  with  the  back  one 
on  each  side.  Off  the  hallways  on  each  side  were  a  closet  and  a  lavatory.  One  of  the 
rear  wings  housed  the  kitchen  and  storage  facilities;  the  other  housed  servants’ 
quarters  and  baths.  A  garage  ran  along  the  outside  of  the  kitchen  wing.40 


[2.35]  Front  view  of  Quarters  5. 


[2.36]  Rear  view  of  Quarters  5. 


The  commander’s  quarters  were  finished  by  30  June  1922  at  a  cost  of  $14,012.  The 
first  occupant,  Colonel  W.  0.  Johnson,  33rd  Infantry,  was  displeased  by  several 
aspects  of  his  new  lodging  and  reported  this  to  his  superiors.  The  roughness  of  the 
concrete  floors,  the  lack  of  ornamental  trim,  and  the  lack  of  blinds  for  privacy  were 


2-27 


of  particular  concern  to  him.  The  Panama  Canal  Constructing  Quartermaster 
replied  to  the  complaint  by  stating  that  the  Panama  Canal  Department  had 
approved  the  construction  plans.  He  also  indicated  that  the  need  for  maximum  ven¬ 
tilation  while  keeping  out  the  rain  led  to  the  choice  of  designing  almost  all  quarters 
in  the  Canal  Zone  with  open  verandahs;  the  use  of  blinds,  he  stated,  would  under¬ 
mine  the  utility  of  this  design.  Although  the  building  was  probably  not  as  comfort¬ 
able  as  it  would  have  been  without  the  imposed  cost  ceiling,  the  Quartermaster’s 
response  ended  the  matter.41 

In  1954  the  commander's  quarters  received  a  detached 
garage.  Otherwise  the  building  remained  much  the  same 
until  1978,  when  the  original  windows  were  replaced  and 
the  window  openings  were  reduced  in  size.  At  this  same  time 
the  porch  screens  and  wood  trim  were  replaced,  and  the 
interior  was  closed  off  from  the  porch.  The  building 
received  central  air  conditioning  in  1988.  The  building's 
use  changed  in  1981  when  it  was  designated  as  NCO  housing. 

Fort  Clayton’s  Place  in  the  Canal  Defense  Mission 

By  the  1920s,  all  components  of  the  original  canal  defense  infrastructure  were  in 
place.  Perched  on  a  shelf  of  Ancon  Hill,  Quarry  Heights  housed  the  Command  that 
coordinated  the  entire  defense  of  the  Panama  Canal.  The  Atlantic  approach  to  the 
canal  was  guarded  by  the  huge  coastal  artillery  guns  bristling  from  Forts  Sherman 
and  Randolph.  On  the  Pacific  side,  Forts  Amador  and  Grant  watched  over  the  canal 
entrance  with  their  powerful  coastal  artillery  batteries.  The  infantry  emplacement  at 
Fort  Davis  protected  the  Gatun  Locks  and  power  plant.  And  by  1922,  with  construc¬ 
tion  of  their  installation  completed,  the  soldiers  of  Fort  Clayton  assumed  their  role 
as  guardians  of  the  Miraflores  and  Pedro  Miguel  Locks. 

Thus  fortified,  the  canal  was  considered  safe  from  any  threat.  And,  for  a  while,  it 
was  [2.37] . 


[2.37]  Aerial  view  of  the  first  buildings  at  Fort 
Clayton. 


2-28 


Notes  for  Chapter  2 

1  Canal  Record,  15  July  1914,  1. 

2  Board  of  Officers  to  Brigadier  General  A. 
Cronkhite,  U.S.A.,  28  August  1917,  Record 
Group  185,  Records  of  The  Panama  Canal, 
1914-1950,  Box  383,  Folder  2,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

3  U.S.  Adjutant  General’s  Office,  Acquisition  of 
Land  in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone:  History  of 
World  War  II  (n.p.,  n.d.),  6-14;  Land  Holdings 
of  the  Armed  Forces  in  the  Canal  Zone 
(Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Panama  Area  Joint 
Committee,  Headquarters  Caribbean  Com¬ 
mand,  1  July  1956),  2;  Canal  Record,  4  Febru¬ 
ary  1920, 357. 

4  James  C.  White,  “Ft.  Clayton— A  History,” 
Southern  Command  News,  3  April  1970,  20. 

5  “Memorial,”  Southern  Command  News,  19 
July  1968,  n.p. 

6  Memorial  marker  hand  inscribed  by  author, 
January  1996. 

7  “Installation  Design  Guide:  Fort  Clayton, 
Panama”  (Jacksonville,  FL:  Harland 
Bartholomew  and  Associates,  September 
1990),  1.1.4;  “Rapid  Ecological  Assessment  of 
the  Lands  in  Panama  Managed  by  the  United 
States  Department  of  Defense”  (n.p.: 

National  Association  for  the  Conservation  of 
Nature  (ANCON),  31  December  1994),  29; 
Geoffrey  C.  Burt  and  Anne  M.  Spafford,  “The 
Shaping  of  Landscapes  at  U.S.  Military  Instal¬ 
lations  in  the  Former  Panama  Canal  Zone, 
Republic  of  Panama”  (Champaign,  IL:  United 
States  Army  Construction  Engineering 
Research  Laboratory,  1996),  34-35. 

8  AG  Historical  Branch,  Military  Personnel,  87. 

9  Ibid.,  88. 

10  Ibid.,  88-93. 

11  Ibid.,  97. 

12  Ibid.,  87,  94-97. 

13  Memorandum  from  Chief  of  Staff,  PCD  to 
Department  Quartermaster,  PCD,  6  August 
1919,  Record  Group  185,  Panama  Canal 
1914-1950,  Box  383,  Folder  2,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

14  Board  of  Officers  to  Brigadier  General  A. 
Cronkhite,  28  August  1917. 

15  J.W.  Joseph,  Mary  Beth  Reed,  and  Mark 
Swanson,  “Peace  Has  Her  Victories  No  Less 


Renowned  Than  War:  A  History  of  Gorgas 
Hospital”  (Mobile,  AL:  U.S.  Army  Corps  of 
Engineers,  1996),  45. 

16  R.  Christopher  Goodwin  and  Associates, 

Inc.,  National  Historic  Context  for 
Department  of  Defense  Installations, 
1790-1940,  Vol.  I  (Baltimore,  MD:  U.S.  Army 
Corps  of  Engineers,  1995),  8,  29, 47, 154, 
175-76,  179. 

17  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the 
Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal 
Year  Ended  June  30,  1919  (Washington,  DC: 
GPO,  1919),  109. 

18  Ibid.,  109. 

19  Ibid.,  348. 

20  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the 
Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal 
Year  Ended  June  30,  1920  (Washington,  DC: 
GPO,  1920),  53. 

21  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  for  1919,  3. 

22  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  for  1917, 

75;  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the 
Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal 
Year  Ended  June  30,  1918  (Washington,  DC: 
GPO,  1918),  13;  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual 
Report  for  1920,  107. 

23  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  for  1920,  53. 

24  Ibid.,  5, 52-53. 

25  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  for  1919, 
7,9. 

26  Ibid.,  347-348;  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual 
Report  for  1920,  53. 

27  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  for  1920, 

5,  53-54. 

28  Ibid.,  53-55,  84;  Letter  from  T.C.  Morris,  Resi¬ 
dent  Engineer,  The  Panama  Canal  to  Depart¬ 
ment  Quartermaster,  Panama  Canal 
Department,  Ancon,  CZ,  6  February  1920, 
Historical  Files,  Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate 
of  Engineering  and  Housing,  United  States 
Army  Garrison-Panama,  1. 

29  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the 
Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal 
Year  Ended  June  30,  1921  (Washington,  DC: 
GPO,  1921),  33-34;  The  Panama  Canal, 
Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The 
Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended  June 
30,  1922  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1922),  23; 
Letter  from  Chester  Harding,  Governor,  The 
Panama  Canal  to  Commanding  General, 
Panama  Canal  Department,  Quarry  Heights, 


CZ,  16  September  1920,  Historical  Files, 
Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate  of  Engineering 
and  Housing,  United  States  Army  Garrison- 
Panama,  1. 

30  Dolores  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  U.S.  Army 
Installations  in  Panama  (Fort  Clayton, 
Panama:  USARSO  History  Office,  1996),  127; 
Baldwin,  History  of  the  Panama  Canal 
Department,  369;  Howland,  The  Infantry  in 
the  Canal  Zone,  382-384. 

31  The  descriptions  of  barracks,  quarters,  and 
administration  buildings  are  direct  quotes 
from  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  for 
1919,  109-113. 

32  “First  Barracks  At  Clayton  Fall  Prey  to  Opera¬ 
tion  Demolition,  Buccaneer,  1  November 
1957,  5;  Letter  from  Lieutenant  Colonel  Martin 
A.  Peters,  U.S.  Army  (Ret)  to  author,  10 
December  1999. 

33  Ibid. 

34  It  appears  likely  that  most  references  in  the 
property  records  to  “iron”  roofing  materials 
actually  refer  loosely  to  some  form  of  ferrous 
sheet  metal.  Iron  (i.e.,  cast  iron)  would  not 
have  been  a  highly  practical  roofing  material 
due  to  its  weight  and  lack  of  ductility.  With 
this  caveat  in  mind,  the  wording  in  the  cur¬ 
rent  text  reflects  the  terminology  in  the  offi¬ 
cial  Army  property  records  without 
necessarily  indicating  the  exact  metallurgical 
composition. 

35  Letter  from  Captain  F.A.  Green,  33rd  Infantry, 
Office  of  the  Quartermaster,  Panama  Canal 
Department  to  Chief  Engineer,  The  Panama 
Canal,  26  November  1921,  Record  Group  185, 
Records  of  The  Panama  Canal,  1914-1950, 
Box  383,  Folder  3,  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

36  Letter  from  A.C.  Miller  and  J.B.  Fields, 
Department  of  Operation  and  Maintenance, 
The  Panama  Canal  to  Engineer  of 
Maintenance,  Panama  Canal  Department,  17 
December  1921,  Record  Group  185,  Records 
of  The  Panama  Canal,  1914-1950,  Box  383, 
Folder  3,  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

37  Letter  from  Colonel  Frank  B.  Hawkins  to 
Commanding  General,  Panama  Canal 
Department,  9  February  1928,  Record  Group 
407,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  General  Central 
Files  1926-1939,  Box  2990,  Fort  Clark  to  Fort 
Clayton,  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

38  Ibid. 


2-29 


39  Letter  from  Constructing  Quartermaster, 
Panama  Canal  Department  to  Engineer  of 
Maintenance,  The  Panama  Canal,  7  March 
1922,  Record  Group  185,  Records  of  The 
Panama  Canal,  1914-1950,  Box  383,  Folder  3, 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion;  College  Park,  MD;  Memorandum  from 
Acting  Chief  Quartermaster,  The  Panama 
Canal  to  Engineer  of  Maintenance,  The 
Panama  Canal,  11  March  1922,  Record  Group 
185,  Records  of  The  Panama  Canal, 


1914-1950,  Box  383,  Folder  3,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

40  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book ,  War  Depart¬ 
ment  Q.M.C.  Form  No.  117  (Old  No.  173  A), 
Revised  27  August  1932,  n.p. 

41  Letter  from  Colonel  W.O.  Johnson,  33rd 
infantry,  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone  to  The 
Adjutant  General  of  the  Army,  14  September 


1922,  Record  Group  185,  Records  of  The 
Panama  Canal,  1914-1950,  Box  383,  Folder  3, 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD;  Letter  from  J.B. 
Fields,  Constructing  Quartermaster,  The 
Panama  Canal  to  Captain  E.M.  George, 
Panama  Canal  Department,  7  November 
1922,  Record  Group  185,  Records  of  The 
Panama  Canal,  1914-1950,  Box  383,  Folder  3, 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD. 


2-30 


CHAPTER  3 


SetUingin  for  the  Century: 

Between  the  Wars  at  Fort  Clayton  (1923-1935) 


Funding  Stagnation  and  Facility  Disrepair 

The  construction  of  Fort  Clayton  was  completed  in  the  early  years  after  World  War  I. 
Over  the  decade  that  followed  the  installation  remained  essentially  unchanged. 
This  fallow  period  was  not  unique  to  Fort  Clayton,  however;  it  was  more  or  less  the 
norm  across  all  U.S.  military  services  at  the  time,  and  most  U.S.  installations  were 
similarly  affected.  Large  war  debts  created  severe  budget  constraints  for  the  War 
Department.  These  constraints  were  effectively  compounded  in  the  arena  of  public 
opinion,  where  a  disarmament  sentiment  was  fueled  by  postwar  idealism;  the  for¬ 
mation  of  the  League  of  Nations  bolstered  a  widespread  belief  that  future  interna¬ 
tional  disputes  could  be  solved  through  negotiation,  making  large  standing  armed 
forces  obsolete.  In  the  face  of  such  public  sentiment  there  was  considerable  pres¬ 
sure  to  reduce  military  expenditures.  And  then  the  Great  Depression  spread  over 
the  nation  like  a  dense,  paralyzing  fog. 


By  the  mid-1920s  the  physical  deterioration  of  World  War  I-era  Army  cantonments 
had  become  serious.  In  response  to  this  problem  Congress  in  1926  enacted  Public 
Law  No.  45,  which  authorized  the  Secretary  of  War  to  close  and  sell  some  installa¬ 
tions  in  order  to  raise  money  for  needed  new  construction.  It  was  during  this  period 
that  the  Quartermaster  Corps  began  to  plan  bases  as  integrated  installations  instead 
of  ad  hoc  agglomerations  of  individual  buildings.  The  Quartermaster  Construction 
Division  Planning  Branch,  created  in  1931,  employed  trained  architects  and  land¬ 
scape  architects.  Their  efforts  were  influenced  by  the  Garden  City  and  City  Beautiful 
urban  planning  movements,  which  had  a  growing  impact  on  Canal  Zone  post 
design  between  the  wars.  These  new  design  influences  reflected  greater  harmony 
with  nature,  simplicity,  utility,  and  unity  of  design.  Topography  was  incorporated, 
not  bulldozed  away,  into  new  road  layouts.  In  residential 


[3.01]  1990s  aerial  view  of  Fort  Clayton  show¬ 
ing  elements  of  design  principles  from  the 
1930s. 


areas,  especially,  roads  meandered  and  curved  with  the 
landscape.  As  posts  expanded  in  terms  of  functional 
units,  the  separation  of  functions  became  more  distinct. 
Installations  developed  spatially  separate  areas  for  hous¬ 
ing,  administration,  physical  plant  support,  etc.  Housing 
was  often  further  divided  into  areas  for  officers,  NCOs, 
and  enlisted  personnel.  New  decentralized  parade 
grounds  were  created,  each  associated  with  a  specific 
functional  area.  Architecturally  the  various  functional 
areas  were  often  unified  through  the  application  of  com¬ 
mon  design  themes  such  as  continuity  of  building  materi¬ 
als.  When  Fort  Clayton  finally  received  funding  for  major 
new  construction  in  the  early  1930s,  these  design  princi¬ 
ples  began  to  appear  in  the  post’s  layout  [3.01, 3.02]. 1 


3-1 


[3.02]  Aerial  view  of  Fort  Clayton  prior  to  1930s 
construction  programs. 


The  Fort  Clayton  Training  Mission 

Although  there  was  no  significant  new  construction  during  the  1920s,  Fort  Clayton 
developed  into  a  busy,  mission-critical  installation  during  this  time.  Fort  Clayton 
was  home  to  one  regiment  comprising  the  33rd  Infantry,  roughly  1200  men.  It  was 
part  of  the  Pacific  Sector,  Panama  Canal  Department,  along  with  Headquarters  and 
Headquarters  Company-Pacific  Sector,  4th  Coast  Artillery,  11th  Engineers,  15lh  Pack 
Train,  and  the  Junior  Mine  Planter  Schumn.2  Training  these  troops  was  part  of  the 
overall  mission  of  the  Command  in  order  to  make  sure  an  effective,  efficient 
defense  organization  was  in  place  [3.03,  3.04]  .3 


3-2 


[3.04]  Members  of  Machine  Gun  Company  M, 
33rd  Infantry,  Fort  Clayton,  March  1933. 


During  the  rainy  season,  from  April  through  November,  troop  readiness  was  main¬ 
tained  through  “technique  and  garrison  training,”  which  consisted  primarily  of  drill 
exercises,  weapons  training,  and  inspections  [3.05,  3.06]. 4  The  horses  and  mules 
needed  rainy  season  “training”  as  well.  About  once  a  week  members  of  the  Service 
Company  would  take  mules  to  a  beach  near  the  ruins  of  Old  Panama,  fill  up  sand¬ 
bags  and  load  them  onto  the  animals  for  delivery  back  to  Fort  Clayton.  This  was  not 
an  idle  exercise:  the  sand  would  be  used  to  keep  down  the  mud  in  the  corral  and 
stable  areas,  and  the  activity  also  kept  the  animals  in  shape.  All  this  rainy  season 
training  was  put  to  use  during  the  December-March  dry  season,  when  the  soldiers 
participated  in  tactical  training  in  the  jungle.  These  exercises  often  involved  both 
Army  and  Navy  personnel  in  joint  maneuvers  and  operations.5 

Two  of  the  most  popular  locations  for  maneuvers  were  Bruja  Point— the  future  loca¬ 
tion  of  Howard  AFB  and  Fort  Kobbe— and  Tocumen,  where  the  international  airport 
would  later  be  built.  The  battalion  troops  would  march  out  to  the  maneuver  site,  set 


[3.05]  Machine  gun  firing  practice  at  the  Fort  Clayton  Firing  Range. 


[3.06]  Machete  instruction  showing  the  correct  method  of  protecting 
the  body  when  down.  Machetes  were  a  basic  weapon  of  jungle  troops. 


3-3 


up  camp,  and  take  field  training  for  a  week  at  a  time.  Service  Company,  33rd 
Infantry,  provided  all  the  necessary  logistical  equipment.  Using  a  combination  of 
wagon  train  (for  tents  and  cots)  and  pack  train  (mules  carrying  provisions)  the  Ser¬ 
vice  Company  would  arrive  before  the  troops  and  unload.  After  lunch  with  the 
troops  they  would  return  to  Fort  Clayton  to  replenish  their  supplies  before  heading 
out  again  the  next  morning  [3.07,  3.08]  ,6 

Most  of  this  training  prepared  the  infantry  soldiers  for  their  primary  mission— protect¬ 
ing  the  canal  locks.  In  1934  they  got  the  opportunity  to  apply  their  training  when  mili¬ 
tary  lock  guards  were  instituted.  Previously  guarded  by  Canal  Zone  Police,  the  Gatun 
Locks  were  put  under  guard  of  14th  Infantry  troops  during  1934  maneuvers.  The 
results  were  so  impressive  that  on  6  April  1934  the  Canal  Zone  Governor  requested 
that  the  Panama  Canal  Department  provide  military  guards  at  all  locks  and  adjacent 
power  plants.  Military  Lock  Guard  details  were  established,  with  one  company  of  the 
14th  Infantry  guarding  at  Gatun  and  one  company  of  the  33rd  Infantry  guarding  the 
Miraflores  Locks,  Pedro  Miguel  Locks,  and  the  Miraflores  power  plant.  Three  Army 
officers  were  to  be  on  duty.  Serving  with  the  Canal  Zone  Police,  the  military  guards 
checked  all  military  personnel  entering  the  area  and  were  charged  to  report  any  sus¬ 
picious  acts.  The  companies  served  14-day  tours  of  duty.  The  troops  were  originally 
housed  in  tents,  but  more  permanent  structures  were  built  over  the  next  few  years.8 


“The  battalion  troops 
rotated  maneuver 
schedules;  the  1st  battalion, 
then  the  2nd  battalion,  then 
the  3rd,  then  the  regiment 
went  out,  so  we  in  the  pack 
and  wagon  trains  were  usu¬ 
ally  on  the  go.” 

James  H.  Sauer,  Service 
Company,  33rd  Infantry, 
1926-19297 


3-4 


Life  at  Fort  Clayton  and  in  the  Canal  Zone 


“My  informant  at  this 
post  states  simply  that: 
This  is  the  best  Infantry 
post  on  the  Zone.” 

Charles  J.  Sullivan, 

19269 


Fort  Clayton  was  not  only  a  place  to 
work  and  train— it  was  a  place  to  live. 
Soldiers  had  ample  opportunity  for 
recreation  during  free  time,  and  the 
Army  provided  a  number  of  facilities 
to  support  that  By  1925  the  1200 
enlisted  men  and  officers  stationed  at 
Fort  Clayton  had  two  tennis  courts,  a 
polo  team  and  playing  field  (marked 
off  the  western  end  of  Miller  Field), 
and  dayrooms  equipped  with  pool 
tables  and  reading  material.  Mail 
arrived  from  and  was  sent  to  the 
United  States  about  three  times  a 
week,  with  an  approximate  transit 
time  of  6-10  days.  There  were 
monthly  dances  that  rotated  between 
Fort  Clayton,  Corozal,  Fort  Amador, 
and  Quarry  Heights  Military  Reserva¬ 
tion,  to  which  soldiers  from  all  other 
posts  were  invited.  Two  golf  courses 
were  available  for  play  on  the  Pacific 
side  of  the  isthmus  as  well.  The  jun¬ 
gle-covered  hills  in  the  back  part  of 
Fort  Clayton  offered  hiking  and  riding 
adventures  for  those  so  inclined 
[3.09,3.10, 3.11, 3.12], 10 

The  command  encouraged  athletic 
competition  among  the  troops.  In 
fact  there  was  a  War  Department 
policy  “of  holding  an  annual  tourna¬ 
ment  in  which  cups,  medals  and 


[3.10]  A  St.  Patrick's  Day  Dance. 


[3.11]  A  bride  and  groom  ride  on  mules  as  they  pass  under  crossed  sabers. 


3-5 


[3.12]  The  tables  are  set  for  the  33rd  Infantry’s  Christmas  meal. 


other  trophies  were  awarded  win¬ 
ning  teams  and  individuals.”11  Com¬ 
petitive  sports  included  baseball, 
track  and  field,  boxing,  horse  shows, 
swimming,  and  tennis  [3.13].  Elimina¬ 
tion  rounds  were  held  at  the  various 
Canal  Zone  installations,  ultimately 


resulting  in  competition  between  the 
best  of  the  Atlantic-  and  of  the 
Pacific-sector  teams  for  the  title  of 
Panama  Canal  Department  Cham¬ 
pion.  Baseball  teams  found  the  tropi¬ 
cal  climate  during  the  dry  season  to 
be  a  relief  from  the  cold  winters  in 


the  United  States,  and  held  training 
camps  and  practice  games  in  the 
Canal  Zone.  Exhibition  games  were 
often  played  against  teams  from  vari¬ 
ous  military  installations  [3.14].  The 
soldiers  who  worked  with  horses 
and  mules  held  their  own  “horse 
shows,”  which  combined  elements 
from  traditional  horse  shows  and 
rodeos.  The  horse  and  mule  teams 
would  be  fixed  up  and  put  through 
their  paces  to  show  off  their  excel¬ 
lent  training.12 

The  33rd  Infantry  Band  provided 
entertainment  for  the  troops  at 
parades,  reviews,  and  the  always- 
popular  baseball  games  as  well  as 
other  sports  events.  Parades  were 
held  as  part  of  Organization  Day, 
usually  in  July.  This  self-invented 
holiday  afforded  an  opportunity  to 
participate  in  a  costume  parade  on 
post  The  band  also  played  at  spe¬ 
cial  events  in  Balboa  and  Panama 


[3.13]  The  1928  Canal  Zone  boxing  [3.14]  Baseball  enthusiasts  watch  a  game  between  the  Montreal  Royals  and  the  Army  All¬ 
champion  hailed  from  Fort  Clayton,  and  Stars  at  Balboa,  Canal  Zone,  14  March  1947. 

many  of  his  fellow  soldiers  rode  the  train 
to  Colon  for  the  championship  bout. 


3-6 


City,  such  as  Fourth  of  July  and 
Panamanian  Independence  Day  fes¬ 
tivities  [3.15, 3.16, 3.17]. 

For  recreational  needs  that  could 
not  be  satisfied  on  post  there  was 
always  the  lure  of  nearby  Panama 
City.  In  the  capital  city  of  the  repub¬ 
lic  soldiers  could  shop  for  items  not 
available  on  post,  or  enjoy  a  wider 
variety  of  food  and  drink,  and  take 
in  exotic  spectacles  such  as  bull¬ 
fights.  During  their  first  3  months  of 
duty  in  Panama,  however,  soldiers 
needed  a  pass  to  visit  the  city.  Any 
soldier  caught  without  a  valid  pass 
could  be  arrested  by  the  military 
police  and  jailed  overnight.  During 
the  1920s  and  early  1930s,  Prohibi¬ 
tion  was  in  force  everywhere  in  the 
Canal  Zone,  including  the  military 
installations.  However,  the  18th 
Amendment  of  the  U.S.  Constitution 
was  not  applicable  in  the  Republic 
of  Panama.  Occasionally  the  com¬ 
mand  would  host  parties  outside  the 
Canal  Zone;  a  company  of  troops 


“The  closest,  the  most 
convenient  and  the 
most  interesting  place 
in  which  to  do  a  tour  of 
‘foreign  service’  is  the 
Panama  Canal  Zone. 
The  voyage,  on  an 
Army  Transport  from 
New  Orleans,  takes  but 
five  days  . . 

Journal  of  the  United 
States  Artillery,  192014 


[3.15]  Preparing  for  the  Organization  Day  Costume  Parade  at  Fort  Clayton,  6  July  1926. 


[3.16]  33rd  Infantry  Organization  Day  program,  6  July  1940. 


[3.17]  U.S.  Army  band  marches  down  Avenida  Central  in  Panama  City  during  Panaman¬ 
ian  Independence  Day  parade,  4  November  1942. 


3-7 


City,  such  as  Fourth  of  July  and 
Panamanian  Independence  Day  fes¬ 
tivities  [3.15, 3.16, 3.17]. 

For  recreational  needs  that  could 
not  be  satisfied  on  post  there  was 
always  the  lure  of  nearby  Panama 
City.  In  the  capital  city  of  the  repub¬ 
lic  soldiers  could  shop  for  items  not 
available  on  post,  or  enjoy  a  wider 
variety  of  food  and  drink,  and  take 
in  exotic  spectacles  such  as  bull¬ 
fights.  During  their  first  3  months  of 
duty  in  Panama,  however,  soldiers 
needed  a  pass  to  visit  the  city.  Any 
soldier  caught  without  a  valid  pass 
could  be  arrested  by  the  military 
police  and  jailed  overnight  During 
the  1920s  and  early  1930s,  Prohibi¬ 
tion  was  in  force  everywhere  in  the 
Canal  Zone,  including  the  military 
installations.  However,  the  18th 
Amendment  of  the  U.S.  Constitution 
was  not  applicable  in  the  Republic 
of  Panama.  Occasionally  the  com¬ 
mand  would  host  parties  outside  the 
Canal  Zone;  a  company  of  troops 


“The  closest,  the  most 
convenient  and  the 
most  interesting  place 
in  which  to  do  a  tour  of 
‘foreign  service’  is  the 
Panama  Canal  Zone. 
The  voyage,  on  an 
Army  Transport  from 
New  Orleans,  takes  but 
five  days  . . 

Journal  of  the  United 
States  Artillery,  192014 


[3.15]  Preparing  for  the  Organization  Day  Costume  Parade  at  Fort  Clayton,  6  July  1926. 


[3.16]  33rd  Infantry  Organization  Day  program,  6  July  1940. 


[3.17]  U.S.  Army  band  marches  down  Avenida  Central  in  Panama  City  during  Panaman¬ 
ian  Independence  Day  parade,  4  November  1942. 


3-7 


would  be  taken  to  a  beach  in 
Panama  where  they  would  be 
treated  to  a  picnic  and  beer.13  In 
addition  to  being  a  beer-drinker’s 
haven,  the  Republic  of  Panama  was 
also  considered  a  sportsman’s  par¬ 
adise,  offering  excellent  hunting 
opportunities  and  world-class  deep- 
sea  fishing.  Over  the  years,  several 
beachfront  and  island  hotels  and 
resorts  were  developed  to  cater  to 
American  tastes  [3.18, 3.19, 3.20]. 

Soldiers’  wives  also  loved  to  visit 
Panama  City  and  Colon  for  the 
shops  and  availability  of  consumer 
goods.  One  of  the  most  popular 
stores  was  The  French  Bazaar  in 
Colon,  originally  opened  for  busi¬ 
ness  in  1825,  which  sold  hats,  frocks, 


shawls,  jewelry,  and  perfumes. 
Another  very  popular  store,  located 
on  Cathedral  Square  in  Panama  City 
next  to  the  Hotel  Central,  was  I.  L. 
Maduro,  Jr.,  which  sold  Panama 
hats,  photographic  film,  Spanish 
mantillas,  silk  shawls,  kimonos, 
curios,  and  souvenirs.  These  desti¬ 
nations  and  others  offered  military 
wives  the  opportunity  to  window 
shop  at  large,  modern  stores  with 
expanses  of  plate  glass  providing  an 
atmosphere  reminiscent  of  an  urban 
U.S.  shopping  district.15 

On  a  Saturday  the  whole  family 
might  go  on  an  outing  to  visit  the 
Summit  Botanical  Garden.  Not  only 
could  visitors  stroll  through  the  gar¬ 
den  and  admire  an  assortment  of 


rare  tropical  trees  and  plants,  they 
could  buy  plants  for  their  own 
yards.  The  Powell  Orchid  Garden,  a 
branch  of  the  Missouri  Botanical 
Garden  of  St  Louis,  Missouri,  spe¬ 
cialized  in  growing  native  orchids, 
including  the  Flor  del  Espiritu  Santo 
(Holy  Ghost)  orchid-the  national 
flower  of  Panama.  Another  popular 
day  trip  was  to  the  Pacific  island  of 
Taboga,  where  families  would  picnic 
on  the  beach.  Special  occasions 
were  often  celebrated  at  the  two 
U.S.-run  hotels  in  Panama-the  Tivoli 
Hotel  in  Ancon  on  the  Pacific  and 
the  Hotel  Washington  in  Colon  on 
the  Atlantic  side.16 

Panama  City  itself  offered  many 
sightseeing  and  holiday  opportuni- 


[3.20]  Soldiers  relax  at  the  Fort  Kobbe  Beach  Club. 


3-8 


West  Indies 


PanamaCanal 

Bermuda  and  the  Spanish  Main 

by  the  S.  S.  MOLTKE  (12,500 
Tons),  leaving  New  York  JAN. 
23,  FEB.  25,  MARCH  29, 
1913,  and  S.  S.  VICTORIA 
LOUISE  (16,500  Tons),  FEB. 
8,  MARCH  11,  APRIL  10, 
1913. 

16  Day*  -  $145  and  up 

21  Day*  -  -  $160  and  up 

28  Day*  *  •  $175  and  up 


SPECIAL  SAILING 
S.S.  CINCINNATI  (17,OOOTons) 
29  Days  from  New  York 
February  1,  1913 
also 

TWO  CRUISES 


from  New  Orleans 
JAN.  23  and  FEB.  10 


by  S.  S.  Kronprinzetsin  Cediie 

(9,000  Tons) 

16  DAYS  -  -  $125  UP 


DELIGHTFUL  CRUISE 

Around  the 
World 

Sailing  from  San  Francisco 
FEBRUARY  6,  1913 

by  S.  S.  Cleveland 

(17,000  Tons) 

110  DAYS  -  $650  and  up 

including  alt  necessary  expenses 
aboard  and  ashore. 

Jamaica  and  the 

PanamaCanal 

Cuba,  Hayti,  Colombia,  Costa  Rica 

Weekly  Sailings,  by  “PRINZ” 
and  other  steamers  of  our 

ATLAS  SERVICE 
Cuba  and  Jamaica,  11  to  18  days 
$85.50 

Panama  Canal  18  to  25  day* 
$140 

25-day  Crnjaes,  $135  and  $140 
NILE  SERVICE 

By  the  Superb  Steamers  of  the 
Hamburg  and  Anglo-American 
Nile  Co.,  leaving  CAIRO  every 
Friday,  TOURS  from  7  to  22  days. 

Write  for  booklet,  elating  c raise 


HAMBURG-AMER1CAN  LINE 

41-45  Broadway,  N.  Y- 


[3.21]  Hamburg-American  Line 
advertisement. 


ties.  The  old  city  of  Panama 
(Panama  Viejo)  still  existed  in  the 
form  of  ruins.  The  city,  founded  by 
Spanish  colonists  in  1519,  was 
sacked  by  the  English  pirate  Henry 
Morgan  in  1671.  The  picturesque 
piles  of  stones  slowly  being  engulfed 
by  luxuriant  vegetation  provided  an 
interesting  spot  to  explore  or  to 
show  off  to  visitors.  The  colonial 
section  of  Panama  City  contained 
the  main  cathedral  and  its  associ¬ 
ated  plaza,  a  focal  point  for  inhabi¬ 
tants  and  visitors  alike.  Visitors  to 
this  area  could  also  see  several 
other  churches,  the  National  The¬ 
ater,  and  the  Presidential  Palace,  the 
latter  having  been  enlarged  and 
restored  in  the  early  1920s.17  Several 
holidays  and  fiestas  were  celebrated 
by  Panamanians  throughout  the 
year.  These  usually  took  on  the 
character  of  street  festivals  with 
parades,  entertainment,  and  food 
vendors.  The  highlight  of  the  year 
was  Carnival,  celebrated  immedi¬ 
ately  before  the  Lenten  season 
began.  Continuing  for  several  days, 
Carnival  featured  neighborhood 


musical  bands,  parades  led  by  the 
‘Carnival  Queen’  and  her  court,  and 
lots  of  fancy  costumes.18 

The  Panama  Canal,  often  called  the 
“Eighth  Wonder  of  the  World”  was  a 
popular  tourist  attraction  in  its  own 
right  Even  before  the  canal  was 
completed  tourists  came  in  droves 
to  witness  part  of  the  monumental 
undertaking.  As  early  as  1913  cruise 
ships  included  stops  at  the  Isthmus 
of  Panama  on  their  itineraries  [3.21]. 
The  relaxed  atmosphere  of  the 
Canal  Zone  lured  as  visitors  some  of 
the  most  glamorous  personalities  of 
the  day,  including  film  stars  such  as 
Clark  Gable  and  Carole  Lombard, 
who  visited  frequently. 

President  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,  the 
Commander-In-Chief  of  U.S.  military 
forces  worldwide,  paid  a  visit  to  the 
Canal  Zone  on  16  October  1935  [3.22, 
3.23].  FDR  disembarked  from  the 
U.S.  Navy  cruiser  Houston  at  the  Bal¬ 
boa  piers  and  took  an  automobile 
tour  of  the  Pacific  side,  leaving  by 
way  of  Gaillard  Highway  for  a  visit  to 


[3.22]  President  Roosevelt  and  Panamanian  dignitaries  during  an  FDR  visit  to  the 
isthmus. 


3-9 


[3.23]  Soldiers  snap  to  attention  as  FDR  passes  during  his  automobile  tour  of  Fort  Clayton. 


Madden  Dam.  The  President  and  his 
entourage  returned  via  Fort  Clayton, 
where  they  reviewed  the  Pacific-sec¬ 
tor  troops  and  were  honored  with  a 
luncheon  at  the  officers’  club. 

The  Panama  Canal’s  administration 
building  also  attracted  tourists.  The 
sheer  bulk  of  this  building  was 
impressive,  and  its  prominent  loca¬ 
tion  provided  spectacular  views  of 
the  Panama  Canal  and  the  town  of 
Balboa.  The  building’s  interior 
boasted  a  rotunda  decorated  with 
murals  depicting  the  canal’s  con¬ 
struction.  Other  art  of  a  similar 
nature  was  also  displayed  in  the 
building.  A  selection  of  1913  litho¬ 
graphs  by  Joseph  Pennel  was  exhib¬ 
ited  in  1928.  The  lithographs  depict 


the  Panama  Canal  at  the  various 
stages  of  completion.  On  the  third 
floor  of  the  building  was  a  museum 


featuring  artifacts  and  documents 
related  to  the  failed  French  attempt 
to  build  a  canal.19 


New  Construction  During  the  Early  1930$ 

Mission  Realignments  and  Post  Expansion 

In  1930  some  Army  officials  began  to  question  whether  the  1st  Battalion,  2nd  Field 
Artillery  should  continue  to  be  deployed  at  Gatun.  The  battalion’s  headquarters  in 
old  canal  construction  buildings  were  run-down  and  considered  beyond  economi¬ 
cal  repair.  Additionally,  some  wanted  the  battalion  to  be  stationed  permanently  on 
the  Pacific  side  of  the  canal.  Soon  the  chain  of  command  became  aware  of  these 
issues  and  an  effort  was  launched  to  find  a  suitable  new  home.  During  1931  three 
alternative  locations  for  the  battalion  were  debated:  Fort  Amador,  Fort  Clayton,  and 
a  new  post  that  would  share  the  border  between  the  Curundu  Military  Reservation 
and  Albrook  Field. 

As  arguments  began  to  distill,  it  was  determined  that  Fort  Amador  was  already  too 
crowded  and  too  far  away  from  the  battalion’s  training  areas.  The  Albrook  link-up 
presented  flight  path  hazards  and  difficult  topography.  The  Fort  Clayton  location 
was  favored  by  many  because  it  still  had  large,  undeveloped  areas  and  was  situated 
near  jungle  terrain,  which  would  be  useful  for  training  purposes.  Opponents  of  the 
Fort  Clayton  alternative  suggested  that  the  undeveloped  area  should  be  kept  open 
for  expansion  of  the  landing  field  and  the  infantry  target  range.  Supporters  of  the 
Fort  Clayton  alternative  countered  that  expanding  the  landing  field  was  of  sec¬ 
ondary  importance  due  to  the  development  of  Albrook  Air  Field  nearby,  and  that 


3-10 


relocating  a  target  range  would  be  much  less  expensive  than  creating  utility  ser¬ 
vices  for  a  brand  new  post.20  In  the  end  it  was  decided  that  the  battalion  would  be 
moved  to  Fort  Clayton,  and  this  decision  led  to  the  construction  of  a  building  that 
would  become  a  landmark  on  the  installation,  and  ultimately  would  serve  as  the 
new  central  core  of  the  installation  [3.24] . 

Funds  for  this  project  came  from  the  War  Department  Army  Housing  Program, 
which  had  been  appropriating  money  for  housing  construction  at  military  bases 
since  1927.  The  field  artillery  battalion  funds  were  earmarked  for  barracks  and  quar¬ 
ters.  In  the  1930  War  Department  Appropriation  Bill  a  total  of  $357,500  was  set  aside 
for  barracks  on  the  Curundu  Military  Reservation.  The  1932  Bill  provided  an  addi¬ 
tional  $80,000  for  NCO  quarters  and  $319,500  for  officers’  quarters 21 

When  the  designs  were  finalized  by  the  Quartermaster  Corps  Construction  Service 
in  early  1932,  the  project  consisted  of  one  battalion  barracks,  two  four-family  NCO 
quarters,  14  company  officers’  quarters,  and  all  necessary  utilities  including  side¬ 
walks,  fire  hydrants,  streetlights,  and  a  transformer  house.  In  addition,  the  frame 
officer’s  club  (Building  38)  and  two  garage  sheds  were  moved  to  new  locations. 

The  battalion  barracks  plan  called  for  a  massive  building  sited  northwest  of  the  origi¬ 
nal  quadrangle  with  its  rear  facing  Gaillard  Avenue  and  its  front  opening  onto  a  large, 
undeveloped  grass  field.  This  location  would  develop  into  one  of  the  two  main  direc¬ 
tions  of  expansion  filled  out  by  new  construction  at  Fort  Clayton  over  the  subsequent 
five  decades.  The  NCO  quarters  were  placed  on  a  line  with  the  existing  NCO  quarters, 
with  the  two  new  buildings  on  the  northwest  end  of  the  line.  The  other  major  direc¬ 
tion  of  development  was  indicated  by  the  location  selected  for  the  new  officers’  hous¬ 
ing.  The  arc  of  officers’  housing  began  near  the  original  officers’  housing  area  and 
stretched  far  to  the  north  before  curving  back  southward  [3.25] .  This  choice  of  loca¬ 
tion  for  the  officers’  housing  emphasized  the  rank  of  its  occupants  through  proximity 


[3.24]  2nd  Field  Artillery  patch. 


[3.25]  The  1933  officers’  quarters  area  with 
curving  street  and  tropical  vegetation. 


3-11 


to  recreational  facilities  and  its  distance  from  the  barracks,  NCO  quarters,  and  sta¬ 
bles.  The  layout  provided  higher  levels  of  privacy  for  commissioned  officers  because 
the  buildings  were  all  constructed  on  the  same  side  of  the  street. 

The  large  expanse  of  open  land  encircled  by  this  line  of  houses,  which  included 
Miller  Field,  would  evolve  into  the  post’s  major  recreation  area.  Known  over  the 
years  as  Jarman  Field  and  the  Fort  Clayton  Community  Park,  this  open  area  would 
be  the  future  site  of  a  golf  course,  a  driving  range,  a  softball  field,  athletic  courts, 
and  a  model  airplane  flying  circle.  The  space  has  hosted  community  fairs  and  a 
variety  of  other  special  events. 

New  Residential  Construction 
Officer  Housing 

Contract  Number  W-61-QM-76  was  awarded  to  the  Winston  Brothers  Company  of 
Minneapolis,  Minnesota,  on  25  August  1932  and  work  began  on  7  September  1932. 
At  times  the  work  force  included  up  to  almost  400  laborers  and  artisans.  All  materi¬ 
als  (except  sand  and  stone)  were  imported  from  the  United  States.  Like  so  many 
Army  buildings  in  the  Canal  Zone,  this  new  housing  was  constructed  of  hollow  con¬ 
crete  block  walls  covered  with  stucco,  concrete  foundations  and  floors,  and  red  tile 
roofs.  The  concrete  blocks  were  manufactured  on  site.  Except  for  some  slight  set¬ 
tling  of  the  fill  material  on  which  the  buildings  were  constructed,  no  difficulties 
were  encountered  during  construction.  By  12  September  1933,  the  project  was  com¬ 
pleted  at  a  cost  of  about  $580, 000.22 

The  first  officers’  quarters  in  this  project  were  begun  on  20  December  1932,  and  the 
last  one  was  started  8  March  1933.  All  were  completed  by  12  September  1933  at  a 
cost  of  just  under  $12,000  each.  The  row  of  officers’  quarters  was  sited  with  the  front 
of  the  buildings  facing  the  open  area  toward  the  quadrangle.  A  service  road  ran 
behind  the  row. 

Buildings  72-85  were  almost  square,  measuring  44  x  52.75  ft  [3.26,  3.27,  3.28,  3.29, 
3.30] .  They  were  designed  in  a  style  that  became  known  simply  as  “tropical”  and 
displayed  the  defining  features  of  U.S.  military  construction  in  Panama.  The  main 
living  areas  were  raised  one  story  on  concrete  pillars,  and  part  of  the  space  under¬ 
neath  was  enclosed  to  provide  servants’  quarters  and  a  storeroom.  The  remaining 
open  area  underneath  was  used  as  a  parking  space. 

The  entrance  to  the  main  living  area  was  through  a  central  door  at  the  top  of  con¬ 
crete  steps,  both  in  front  and  back.  A  wide  verandah  with  louvered  lower  walls  and 
large  screened  openings  formed  the  exterior  wall  around  the  front  of  the  quarters. 
A  combination  living  room  and  dining  room  ran  through  the  center  of  the  house, 
with  bedrooms  and  baths  to  each  side.  A  third  bedroom  on  one  side  was  balanced 
by  the  kitchen  on  the  other  side.  Swinging  screened  casement  windows  with  slatted 
wooden  openings  were  used  throughout,  except  for  the  porch.  The  tile  roofs  were 
overhanging  and  low-pitched. 

The  only  subsequent  major  modifications  to  these  quarters 
were  the  enclosing  of  the  porch  and  window  replacement .  The 

3-12 


[3.27]  Houses  being  erected  in  “Colonels’  Row,” 
Fort  Clayton,  25  May  1933. 


3-13 


porches  were  enclosed  sometime  before  1968  with  stucco 
masonry  to  match  the  existing  walls.  In  1968,  the  existing 
porch  windows  and  door  were  removed  and  awning  windows  were 
installed.  These  windows  functioned  like  jalousies  except 
they  were  configured  in  three  large  glass  panes  that  swung 
outward.  Existing  window  air  conditioning  units  were 
reinstalled.  All  windows  in  the  non-porch  areas  underwent 
the  same  treatment  in  1978.  When  central  air  conditioning  was 
introduced  in  1988,  aluminum  double-hung  windows  with  heat¬ 
absorbing  glass  were  installed.  In  1991  security  grilles 
were  added  to  the  ground-floor  window  openings  as  well  as  win¬ 
dows  on  the  upper  floor  near  points  of  entry.  Buildings  72-85 
remained  in  use  as  officers'  quarters  until  Fort  Clayton 
closed  in  1999.  All  of  these  buildings  were  recategorized  as 
field  officers'  quarters  before  the  mid-1980s. 

A  second  wave  of  officer  housing  construction  proved  necessary  to  accommodate 
the  2nd  Field  Artillery.  In  1934  two  field  officers’  quarters  (Buildings  86  and  87)  were 
constructed,  oriented  with  rears  to  the  street  and  sited  to  continue  the  line  of  offi¬ 
cers’  quarters  built  in  1933.  Although  conforming  to  the  tropical  design  elements 
mentioned  previously,  these  two  buildings  reflected  the  higher  rank  of  their  occu¬ 
pants  through  extra  stylistic  architecture  and  amenities. 

The  Panama  City  firm  of  Grebien  y  Martinz,  Incorporated,  won  the  contract  on  20  June 
1934.  Funding  for  the  project  was  allotted  to  the  War  Department  through  the  National 
Industrial  Recovery  Act.  Approximately  7  months  later  the  construction  project  was 
completed  at  a  cost  of  about  $18,000  per  unit  [3.31].  As  with  the  other  2nd  Field 
Artillery  projects,  construction  materials  were  imported  from  the  U.S.  In  this  case, 
however,  an  exception  was  made  for  the  roofing  tiles:  having  asked  for  and  received 
special  dispensation  from  the  Secretary  of  War,  locally  made  tile  was  utilized.23 

These  two-story  buildings  measured  49  x  47.6  ft  and  had  a  wide  verandah  running 
along  the  front  [3.32].  A  series  of  small  screened  openings  under  the  verandah 


screens  helped  to  provide  proper  ventilation.  Moderately  pitched  red  clay  tile  gable 
roofs  with  wide,  overhanging  eaves  capped  the  buildings,  and  mediaguas  were 
employed  as  elsewhere  on  Fort  Clayton.  A  copper  roof  extended  over  the  verandah. 
Strategically  placed  interior  transoms  were  used  to  enhance  interior  ventilation. 
This  second  wave  of  1930s-era  officers’  quarters  exhibited  details  characteristic  of 
the  Mission  style  of  architecture,  especially  in  the  elaborately  shaped  parapets  on 
either  side  of  the  roof  and  the  cutout  shapes  of  the  concrete  piers.  Tile  hoods  pro¬ 
tected  the  casement  windows  on  the  first  floor. 


The  lower  floor  housed  a  servant’s  room  with  bath  and  closet  (unusual)  as  well  as 
an  enclosed  laundry  room,  dry  closet,  and  storeroom  [3.33].  The  upper  floor  veran¬ 
dah  entrance  led  through  pocket  doors  into  a  central  combined  living  and  dining 
room.  This  area  sported  built-in  bookcases  and  a  china  cabinet.  The  three  bed¬ 
rooms  and  kitchen  were  located  to  the  sides.  Each  bedroom  had  its  own  bath— 
which  was  unusual  for  this  type  of  building— and 
rather  large,  individual  closets.  The  kitchen  had 
plenty  of  windows,  and  was  equipped  with  an 
electric  range,  refrigerator,  and  built-in  cabinets. 

Glass  transoms  between  the  living  area  and  two  of 
the  bedrooms  enhanced  interior  ventilation. 

The  1934  field  officers'  quarters  were 
ultimately  modified  along  the  same 
lines  as  the  other  officers'  quarters 
in  the  row.  The  screened  openings 
were  replaced  with  windows,  and  the 
windows  were  replaced  again  in  1987 
with  metal  double-hung  windows  with 
heat-absorbing  glass.  Wire  grille 
openings  near  the  upper  level 
finished  floor  line  of  the  porch  were 


[3.34]  Concrete  frame  in  place  and  roof 
construction  underway  on  NCO  quarters,  Build¬ 
ings  801-802,  25  May  1933. 


removed  and  filled.  In  1991,  security 
grilles  were  added  to  the  ground- 
floor  window  openings  and  those  on 
the  upper  floor  near  points  of  entry. 

NCO  Housing 

Construction  of  the  four-family  NCO  quarters 
began  on  7  December  1932  and  was  completed  on 
12  September  1933,  at  a  cost  of  about  $30,400  each 
[3.34,  3.35,  3.36,  3,37].  These  quarters  were  built 
under  the  same  contract  awarded  to  the  Winston 
Brothers  Company  that  included  the  officers’  quar¬ 
ters  and  the  battalion  barracks.  As  with  the  offi¬ 
cers’  row,  these  quarters  were  sited  with  the  rear 
of  the  building  facing  the  street  and  the  living 
areas  overlooking  an  open  expanse.  Since  the 


[3.35]  NCO  quarters,  Buildings  800-801, 
1941-1942. 


3-17 


NCO  quarters  were  on  the  edge  of  the  post,  residents  could  relax  on  the  screened 
porch  and  take  in  a  first-class  view  of  the  Panama  Canal. 

The  rectangular  buildings  measured  38.75  x  72  ft.  The  usual  tropical-style  features 
were  employed:  raised  living  area,  concrete  frame  construction  with  stucco  hollow 
tile  walls,  Spanish  tile  roofs,  mediaguas,  casement  windows,  ventilation  louvers, 
and  large  screened  openings.  Similar  to  the  officers’  quarters,  the  ground  floor  was 
primarily  open  for  car  parking,  but  part  of  the  area  underneath  was  enclosed  to  pro¬ 
vide  four  storerooms— one  for  each  family.  The  storeroom  windows  were  covered 
with  decorative  concrete  grilles.  No  servant’s  quarters  were  provided. 

A  ground  floor  entrance  led  to  a  set  of  interior  stairs.  Each  of  the  four  apartments 
had  an  open  living  room  and  dining  room  with  a  verandah  running  the  width  of 
both.  There  were  two  bedrooms  on  the  side,  each  with  its  own  dry  closet.  Each 
kitchen  (off  the  dining  room  to  the  rear)  was  equipped  with  a  gas  range,  electric 
refrigerator,  and  built-in  cupboard.  Exterior  stairs  led  down  from  the  kitchen  to  the 
parking  area  and  street. 

The  exterior  appearance  of  the  quarters  has  been  altered 
most  by  the  replacement  of  windows.  In  1955  the  windows  and 
screened  openings  on  the  verandah  were  replaced  with 
jalousie  windows.  The  metal  louvers  below  the  porch 
screens  were  removed  and  the  area  was  filled  in,  reducing 
the  exterior  wall  openings  on  the  front  facade.  In  most 
rooms  the  jalousies  were  made  of  opaque  glass,  but  in  the 
bedrooms  they  were  aluminum.  Windows  were  changed  again  in 
1971,  when  aluminum  framed  awning  windows  were  installed. 
These  windows  were  slightly  smaller  than  the  ones  they 
replaced,  so  more  open  area  was  lost.  This  was 
particularly  true  on  the  front  of  the  building,  where  the 
large  veranda  openings  were  each  divided  in  two  and  short¬ 
ened.  The  newly  created  middle  area  became  the  location 
for  a  window  air  conditioning  unit.  In  1982  the  laundry 
area  on  the  ground  floor  was  improved  and  surrounded  with  a 
decorative  concrete  block  wall.  Central  air  conditioning 
was  installed  in  1988. 

Battalion  Barracks  (Building  95) 

The  battalion  barracks  facility  was  started  on  18  November  1932  and  completed  on 
12  September  1933,  at  a  cost  of  about  $260,000  [3.38,  3.39].  The  large,  three-story 
rectangular  building  was  designed  to  accommodate  four  companies  of  field 
artillery  personnel.  The  building  measured  512.5  x  71.2  ft  with  two  wings  on  the 
rear,  each  measuring  55  x  141.2  ft. 

The  south  end  of  Building  95  housed  Battery  A;  Battery  B  occupied  the  south-center 
area;  Battery  C  was  located  in  the  north  end;  and  the  Headquarters  (HQ)  Battery 
was  in  the  north-central  area.  These  spaces  provided  housing  for  approximately  500 


3-19 


[3.38]  Exterior  walls  of  Building  95  under  con¬ 
struction,  28  June  1933. 


[3.39]  Building  95  center  sally  port  under  con¬ 
struction,  28  June  1933. 


enlisted  men.  Batteries  A  and  C  had  their  own  entrances  on  the  front  fagade,  while 
Battery  C  and  HQ  Battery  entered  from  the  central  sally  port  [3.40].  The  walls  of  the 
building  in  the  public  areas  of  the  first  floor  were  made  of  concrete  block  to  a 
height  of  only  about  3.5  ft.  Large  screened  openings  comprised  the  remainder  of 
the  exterior  wall,  promoting  a  refreshing  flow  of  air  from  the  9  ft  wide  passageway 
lining  the  front  of  the  building.  Wrought  iron  railings  lined  the  edge  of  the  passage¬ 
way.  The  exterior  walls  of  the  second  and  third  floors  consisted  of  metal  louvers  for 
the  lower  third  of  the  opening,  with  screens  above  to  promote  good  ventilation  for 
the  upper  floors. 

Continuous  mediaguas  wrapped  around  the  building  above  the  first  and  second 
floor  levels.  The  most  distinctive  features  of  the  building  were  the  battery  entrances 


3-20 


[3.40]  Front  elevations,  Building  95. 


and  the  central  sally  port.  The  entrances  were  prominently  decorated  with  immense 
stuccoed-concrete  door  surrounds  that  extended  the  full  three  stories  to  create  a  uni¬ 
fying  element  for  the  building.  The  center  sally  port  decorative  surround  was 
repeated  on  the  rear  elevation.  On  the  second  and  third  floors,  the  surrounds  pro¬ 
vided  loggias  with  decorative  concrete  block  railings  [3.41  ] .  The  legend  “2nd  FIELD 
ARTILLERY”  was  spelled  out  in  10  in.  aluminum  letters  over  the  sally  port  [3.42]. 


The  interior  layout  of  Building  95  was  identical  for  Batteries  A,  B,  and  C.  On  the  first 
floor,  each  had  a  mess  hall,  dayroom,  and  storeroom.  Stairs  led  upward  from  each 
side  of  the  dayroom.  A  series  of  smaller  rooms  was  located  to  the  side  of  the  day- 
room  for  use  by  the  Battery  Commanding  Officer,  the  1st  Sergeant,  tailor,  and  barber. 
The  rear  wings  were  placed  across  the  partition  walls  separating  the  batteries  and 
were  directly  off  the  mess  halls.  Each  wing  contained  mirror  halves  for  food  service, 
with  a  serving  room,  utility  room,  kitchen,  storeroom,  refrigerator  equipment  room, 
cold  storage  room,  mess  sergeant  room,  and  cooks’  room.  A  loading  platform  ran 
across  the  back  of  each  wing.  The  first  floor  of  the  HQ  Battery  had  a  slightly  different 
layout:  the  mess  hall  was  smaller  and  the  tailor’s  room  was  eliminated;  a  headquar¬ 
ters  office,  office  for  the  battalion  commander,  and  an  NCO  room  were  added. 


[3.41]  Building  95  architectural  detail. 


3-21 


[3.42]  2nd  Field  Artillery  Inspection  in  front  of  Building  95. 


[3.43]  The  45th  Cavalry  celebrates  Organization  Day  in  front  of  Build¬ 
ing  95, 1952. 


The  second  and  third  floors  were  nearly  identical  for  each  battery,  with  open  squad 
rooms  for  60  men  and  three  NCO  rooms  (except  HQ  Battery  2nd  floor,  which  accom¬ 
modated  58  men  and  2  NCOs).  The  squad  rooms  contained  the  stairways.  Each  sec¬ 
tion  of  the  upper  floors  also  had  a  locker  room  and  a  dry  room  (larger  version  of 
the  dry  closet).  On  both  floors,  toilets  were  located  in  the  rear  wings  over  the 
kitchen  areas.  There  were  also  four  attic  storage  rooms. 

In  the  1940s  Building  95  became  home  to  the  45th  Cavalry 
[3.43].  It  continued  to  house  troops  until  1961,  at  which 
time  utilization  was  changed  radically  and  it  was 
remodeled  and  converted  into  a  community  services  center. 
(These  major  changes  and  later  ones  are  discussed  in  their 
own  historical  context  in  later  chapters.) 

The  open  nature  of  the  building  gradually  disappeared  as 
air  conditioning  made  its  appearance  in  the  Canal  Zone. 
Reflecting  changes  that  would  eventually  affect  most  of 
Fort  Clayton's  earlier  buildings,  the  large  screened  open¬ 
ings  were  replaced  with  smaller  windows.  To  accomplish 
this  some  of  the  extra  window  space  had  to  be  infilled  with 
concrete  masonry  blocks;  these  were  covered  with  stucco  to 
match  the  existing  walls.  In  many  cases,  however,  the  win¬ 
dow  openings  were  filled  in  completely.  For  Building  95, 
these  changes  took  several  decades  to  complete,  starting 
in  the  1960s  and  continuing  into  the  1980s*.  The  reason  for 
this  pace  of  renovation  was  that  interior  areas  were  air 
conditioned  piecemeal  as  the  technology  developed  and  as 
space  utilization  dictated.  The  most  critical  zones  in  the 
building  were  the  first  to  be  retrofitted  with  circulation 
ductwork.  For  Building  95  and  many  of  the  large  buildings 
on  post,  cooled  air  was  first  provided  in  the  early  1960s  by 
compressors,  evaporators,  and  air  ducts.  The  necessary 
machinery  was  installed  in  several  locations  throughout 


3-22 


the  building.  Next,  window-mounted  units  became  affordable 
enough  to  install  as  needed  to  supplement  the  original 
system.  In  the  early  1970s  a  chilled  water  system  was 
installed,  cooling  indoor  air  via  multiple  chillers 
located  around  the  building  perimeter.  Eventually  this 
1970s  chiller  system  was  supplanted  by  more  centralized 
chiller  plants  purposefully  built  to  serve  several 
buildings  at  once.  The  progression  through  each  of  these 
systems  was  gradual,  and  94  window  units  were  still 
operating  in  Building  95  when,  in  1980,  the  remote  chiller 
system  was  installed. 


New  Operations  and  Support  Facilities 


Stable  Areas 


In  1917,  when  fill  material  was  being  placed  at  the  Miraflores  dump  for  the  antici¬ 
pated  construction  of  Fort  Clayton,  there  were  286  private  passenger  automobiles  in  13  AA]  U.S.  forces  crossing  Miraflores  Locks 

over  a  lock  gate  (c.  1928). 

the  Canal  Zone.  By  1921,  even  though  there  were  2113  auto¬ 


mobiles  and  392  motorcycles  registered,  there  were  few 
roads  on  which  to  drive  them.  The  only  modern  way  to 
cross  the  isthmus  from  Fort  Clayton  to  her  sister  post,  Fort 
Davis,  was  by  railroad.  Until  1930,  when  The  Panama  Canal 
established  ferry  service  at  Balboa,  the  only  methods  of 
crossing  from  one  bank  of  the  canal  to  the  other  were  by 
boat  or  by  walking  across  the  tops  of  the  canal  lock  gates 
[3.44,  3.45].  Pack  mules  were  also  walked  across  the  lock 
gates  to  haul  supplies.24 

By  1927  there  were  848  horses  and  mules  under  the  jurisdic¬ 
tion  of  the  Panama  Canal  Department.  Of  those  assigned  to 
the  33rd  Infantry  and  the  11th  Engineers  at  Fort  Clayton, 
there  were  79  riding  horses,  93  draft  horses,  118  pack  mules, 


3-23 


and  28  riding  mules 25  With  notification  that  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  Battalion  would 
be  arriving  and  stationed  at  Fort  Clayton,  a  new  stable  area  was  designated  for  the 
battalion’s  pack  animals  and  equipment.  The  stables  and  support  buildings  were 
constructed  northwest  of  the  original  quadrangle  and  the  1-20  housing  area.  The 
field  artillery  stables  included  Buildings  102,  105,  108,  and  111.  The  covered  picket 
lines,  which  were  similar  in  design  and  function  to  the  stables,  included  Buildings 
101,  104,  107,  and  110.  Support  buildings  for  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  stable  area 
included  four  equipment  sheds  (Buildings  100,  103,  106,  and  109)  for  storage  of  hay 
and  fodder,  bridles,  saddles,  tack,  and  other  related  equipment  [3.46].  One  equip¬ 
ment  shed  also  included  quarters  for  stable  hands. 

The  contractor  for  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  stable  project  was  Navarro  y  Compania,  a  local 
firm  from  Panama  City.  The  selected  site  was  an  open  grass  field.  The  project  was  initi¬ 
ated  on  28  March  1933  and  was  completed  and  accepted  for  use  by  the  military  on  3 
November  1933.  In  addition  to  the  construction  of  the  stables  and  support  buildings 
Navarro  y  Compania  built  the  utility  infrastructure  for  the  area,  including  one  trans¬ 
former  house,  streets,  storm  water  drainage  system,  sanitary  sewer  system,  water  distri¬ 
bution  and  fire  protection  systems,  and  the  adjoining  electrical  distribution  system. 

Between  1923  and  1935  a  number  of  buildings  were  added  to  the  33rd  Infantry  stable 
area,  but  not  all  of  these  structures  were  related  to  the  stables.  The  first  buildings  to 
be  constructed  were  a  rigging  shed  (Building  50),  a  blacksmith  and  woodshed 
(Building  51),  a  coal  bin  and  loading  platform  (Building  56),  compost  pits  (Building 
58),  a  post  storage  house  (Building  59),  and  a  paint  and  oil  storehouse  (Building 
125)  [3.47, 3.48,  3.49, 3.50] .  Building  51  was  constructed  from  material  salvaged  from 
abandoned  buildings  at  Camp  Gaillard.26  In  addition  to  a  blacksmith’s  shop  the 
building  included  an  officers’  saddle  room,  an  enlisted  men’s  saddle  room,  a 
mechanic’s  shop,  and  toilets.  These  support  buildings  were  similar  in  design  and 
construction  to  the  others  in  the  33rd  Infantry  stable  area.  Wood  siding  and  sheet 
metal,  both  of  which  were  inexpensive  standard  building  materials  for  temporary 


[3.46]  Building  106,  Field  Artillery  Equipment 
Shed  for  One  Battery. 


[3.47]  Rigging  line  in  Building  50,  Rigging  Shed. 
Note  the  Spanish  yokes. 


3-24 


Bu?&*sy 


utility  structures,  were  not  expected  to  last  more  than  20  years.  Often  in  buildings  of 
this  type  the  floors  were  no  more  than  packed  earth. 

New  stables  built  in  this  same  area  for  the  33rd  Infantry  included  a  Panama  Canal 
Department  stable  for  10  animals  (Building  57),  one  stable  building  for  52  animals 
(Building  42),  and  3  covered  picket  lines  for  56  animals  each  (Buildings  60,  61,  and 
62).  The  PCD  stable  was  constructed  from  salvaged  material  from  Camp  Gaillard;  it 
included  ten  facing  stalls  divided  by  a  central  passage.  In  addition  to  the  animal 
stalls  the  building  contained  a  forage  room,  a  harness  room,  latrines,  and  billeting 
for  several  men.27 

During  the  1930s  the  infantry  began  to  gradually  replace 
horsepower  with  mechanized  transport  [3.51,  3.52].  There 
were  no  new  stables  constructed  after  those  for  the  2nd 
Field  Artillery,  and  the  last  animals  were  transported  off 


[3.51]  An  attempt  to  mount  mules  with  anti¬ 
aircraft  machine  guns-“the  mules  didn’t  like  it.” 
James  H.  Sauer,  2000. 


4- 


[3.52]  The  2nd  Field  Artillery  prepares  for  a 
retiree's  final  ride. 


3-26 


of  Fort  Clayton  in  1942.  The  area  formerly  occupied  by  the 
2nd  Field  Artillery  stables  became  the  motor  pool  [3.53]  . 28 
To  adapt  these  buildings  to  motor  pool  use,  various  alter¬ 
ations  were  made  in  1959,  1964,  1983,  1987,  and  1995.  These 
alterations  were  primarily  made  to  enclose  the  space  and 
to  air  condition  parts  of  the  buildings  serving  as  tool 
rooms,  storage  rooms,  dispatch  offices,  and  classrooms. 

Ordnance  Storage  Magazines 

In  1930  six  ordnance  storage  magazines,  Buildings  64-69,  were  built  at  Fort  Clayton 
[3.54].  These  magazines  were  made  of  concrete  and  concrete  block  with  galvanized 
iron  roofs.  Each  had  a  steel  door  and  an  18  in.  roof  ventilator  for  cooling  the  facility. 


[3.54]  Building  68,  Ordnance  Storage 
Magazine. 


3-27 


The  buildings  were  located  in  a  vacant  area  northeast  of  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  sta¬ 
bles,  near  the  area  where  Quarters  307,  315,  and  323  would  be  built.  Both  the  need 
to  build  these  magazines  and  the  choice  of  location  were  the  indirect  result  of  a 
deadly  1926  fire  at  a  New  Jersey  naval  depot.  In  the  aftermath  of  this  disaster  the  70th 
Congress  set  out  formal  requirements  for  the  design  and  carrying  capacity  of  Army 
and  Navy  ammunition  storage  areas,  including  specification  of  standoff  distances 
between  munitions  storage  and  people.  To  store  Fort  Clayton’s  ordnance  at  a  safe 
distance  from  people  and  other  buildings,  as  specified  by  Congress,  these  new  stor¬ 
age  magazines  were  needed.29 


Miller  Landing  Field 

On  29  March  1917  the  first  Army  Air  Corps  personnel  arrived  on  the  isthmus.  Desig¬ 
nated  the  7th  Observation  Squadron,  two  officer  pilots  and  51  enlisted  men  under 
the  command  of  Captain  H.  H.  “Hap”  Arnold,  the  unit  was  stationed  on  the  Atlantic 
side  of  the  isthmus  and  used  the  Fort  Sherman  parade  field  as  the  runway  for  its  two 
Curtis  R4  observation  planes.  In  October  1917  work  began  on  a  permanent  Canal 
Zone  military  airfield,  which  would  be  known  as  France  Field.  By  1925  France  Field 
was  home  to  the  6th  Composite  Group,  composed  of  577  officers,  623  enlisted  men, 
and  38  airplanes.30  According  to  Army  Air  Service  Captain  T.  S.  Voss,  “the  mission  of 
the  Army  Air  Force  in  the  Canal  Zone  is  to  gain  and  maintain  sufficient  air  superior¬ 
ity  to  secure  the  canal  and  its  accessories  against  an  air  attack,  to  observe  fire  for 
the  Coast  and  Field  Artillery,  to  cooperate  with  the  Infantry,  to  attack  any  enemy 
land  or  naval  forces  and  to  cooperate  with  the  Navy  in  the  execution  of  its 
mission.”31 

To  support  the  mission  of  the  6th  Composite  Group,  rudimentary  landing  fields  were 
constructed  at  several  military  bases  throughout  the  Canal  Zone,  including  Coco 
Solo  submarine  base  on  the  Atlantic  side,  and  Fort  Amador,  Albrook  Field,  and  Fort 
Clayton  on  the  Pacific  side.  The  landing  field  at  Fort  Clayton,  sometimes  called  Miller 
Field,  was  located  in  the  far  northwest  corner  of  the  base  through  a  corner  of  what 
would  later  become  the  main  quadrangle  and  motor  pool  area.32  This  field  may  have 
been  functional  as  early  as  7  March  1919,  when  a  request  was  made  by  the  Panama 
Canal  Department  to  The  Panama  Canal  to  construct  a  “temporary  shelter  for  an  air¬ 
plane  at  the  southeastern  end  of  the  Miraflores  Lake  near  the  railroad  tunnel.”33  The 
field  was  only  used  for  emergencies,  how¬ 
ever,  and  planes  were  not  normally  present.34 

By  1928,  the  airfield  at  Fort  Clayton  included 
a  U.S.  All-Steel  Hangar,  a  standard  hangar 
design  that  was  used  at  airfields  throughout 
the  United  States  [3.55,  3.56].  The  hangar  at 
Miller  Field  was  prefabricated,  and  mea¬ 
sured  66  ft  in  width,  and  140  ft  in  length.30  In 
1929  Congress  appropriated  funds  for  the 
construction  of  a  permanent  Air  Corps 
installation,  Albrook  Field,  which  was  com¬ 
pleted  in  1931.  After  that,  use  of  the  facility  at 


[3.55]  Hangar  and  planes  at  Fort  Clayton's 
Miller  Flying  Field  (c.  1927). 


3-28 


[3.56]  Miller  Flying  Field  consisted  of  a  sod  run¬ 
way  and  a  standard-design  Army  hangar. 


Fort  Clayton  declined.  The  Miller  Field  runway  was  officially  closed  on  18  June 
1932 36  Construction  of  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  stables  at  Fort  Clayton  required  the 
removal  of  the  hangar  facility.  In  April  1933,  Army  Air  Corps  Brigadier  General 
Westover  recommended  that  some  elements  of  the  demountable  hangar  be  dis¬ 
mantled  and  re-erected  at  Albrook  Field.  The  hangar  was  dismantled  and  moved  to 
Albrook  on  11  April  1933.37 

Air  Corps  Barracks  and  Operations  Building 

The  last  of  the  operations  support  buildings  to  be  constructed  during  this  era  was 
Building  63  [3.57].  Built  in  January  1929  as  an  Air  Corps  barracks  and  operations 
office,  Building  63  was  elevated  3  ft  above  ground  as  was  typical  of  this  early  con¬ 
struction.  The  foundation  consisted  of  concrete  and  wood  posts,  with  wood  floors 
and  walls  and  a  galvanized  iron  roof.  A  large  barracks  room  took  up  most  of  the 


[3.57]  Building  63,  Air  Corps  Barracks  and 
Operations  Office  for  12  men. 


3-29 


floor  space,  which  totaled  2180  sq  ft 38  The  remainder  of  the  floor  space  included  a 
closet,  lavatory,  and  an  officers’  room.  There  was  a  screened  porch  along  the  front 
of  the  building,  with  two  open  porches  located  on  the  side. 

In  June  1934  the  building  was  moved  125  ft  from  the  former  emergency  landing  field 
to  just  southeast  of  Building  100  in  the  stable  area.  Minor  alterations  were  made  and 
a  wing  addition  was  built  prior  to  its  designation  as  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  Supply 
Office  and  Stable  Guard.  Creosote  was  liberally  applied  to  the  wood  members  as  a 
termite  deterrent.  The  building  included  a  guardroom,  dormitory  with  toilet,  unit 
supply  office,  and  issue  room. 

Building  63  was  demolished  sometime  after  1964.  A  library 
reading  room  had  been  added  at  some  point  during  the  build¬ 
ing's  service  life,  and  its  contents  were  moved  to 
Building  95  before  demolition. 


New  Community  Facilities 
Miller  Field  Grandstand 

The  southeast  area  of  the  landing  field  became  known  as  Miller  Field,  an  athletic 
and  recreation  area.  A  grandstand  with  seating  for  700  (Building  48)  was  con¬ 
structed  adjacent  to  the  track  circle  in  1923  [3.58]. 

Other  Athletic  and  Exercise  Facilities 

The  command  showed  its  support  of  athletics  during  this  period  by  constructing  a 
gymnasium,  bowling  alley,  swimming  pool,  and  later,  a  golf  course.  The  first  gymna¬ 
sium  (Building  52)  built  at  Fort  Clayton  was  completed  in  October  1925  [3.59]. 
Located  immediately  north  of  Quarters  10  on  the  corner  of  Hawkins  Street  and 
Stewart  Loop,  the  140  x  66  ft  building  was  the  second  of  the  two  U.S.  All-Steel  stan¬ 
dard  hangars  erected  at  Fort  Clayton.39  The  gymnasium  included  a  large  open  area 
and  boxing  training  room  on  the  first  floor.  The  partial  second  floor  included  squad 


[3.58]  Soldiers  compete  in  tug  o’  war  at  a  Panama  Canal  [3.59]  Building  52,  Gymnasium,  1939. 

Department  track  meet  at  Miller  Field,  1935. 


3-30 


room  and  storeroom.  One  year  after  the  gym  was  completed,  a  bowling  alley  (Build¬ 
ing  53)  was  built  adjacent  and  attached  to  its  northeast  wall.  The  four-lane  bowling 
alley  included  a  seating  space  for  the  pinsetter  2  ft  above  the  floor  [3.60] . 

The  bowling  alley  was  replaced  by  Building  101  in  1943,  and 
the  gym  was  demolished  and  replaced  in  1951. 

In  1925  a  swimming  pool  was  constructed  in  the  newly  designated  athletic  and 
recreation  area.  The  pool,  designated  Facility  55,  was  located  on  the  opposite  side 
of  Hawkins  Street,  just  southwest  of  the  gymnasium  [3.61  ] . 

The  swimming  pool  was  replaced  by  Facility  452  in  1948. 

The  Fort  Clayton  golf  course  was  created  before  1941-probably  in  the  late  1930s. 
The  nine-hole  course  took  up  most  of  the  open  space  between  the  original  officers’ 
quarters  and  outward  arc  of  the  officers’  quarters  built  in  1933.  A  ball  field  and 


[3.60]  Bowling  alley  in  front  of  the  adjoining 
gymnasium. 


[3.61]  Fort  Clayton's  first  swimming  pool. 


grandstand  utilized  the  far  northwest  part  of  the  open  area,  and  a  tennis  court  was 
located  near  the  end  of  the  line  of  1933  officer  housing. 

A  golf  clubhouse  (Building  167)  was  built  by  1949,  prior  to 
which  a  hutment  and  shed  had  served  as  shelter.  A  water 
distribution  system  for  the  course  was  put  in  place  about 
the  same  time,  and  several  drainage  ditches  were  dug.  A 
driving  range  was  also  built  during  this  time. 

This  configuration  of  open  area  lasted  for  about  three 
decades  with  some  minor  changes.  In  April  1968  a  model  air¬ 
plane  flying  field  was  built  in  the  park.  The  half -circle  fly¬ 
ing  circle  was  enclosed  within  a  4  ft  chain-link  fence.  The 
center  circular  concrete  slab  was  10  ft  in  diameter,  and 
ringed  by  a  grassy  area,  which  in  turn  was  enclosed  by  a  6 
ft  concrete  circle.  The  total  radius  of  the  flying  field  was 
62  ft.  The  golf  course  was  officially  disposed  of  in  1975  by 
order  of  the  Commander,  193rd  Infantry  Brigade,  but  was  not 
actually  razed  until  1983.  The  driving  range  remained,  but 
was  moved  slightly  to  the  east.  The  southern  part  of  the 
open  area,  now  named  the  Fort  Clayton  Community  Park,  con¬ 
tained  a  playground  and  a  circular  arrangement  of  five 
bohios  (thatched  huts  of  an  indigenous  style)  for 
recreational  use.  The  former  golf  clubhouse  had  been 
converted  into  an  officer's  club  for  junior  officers  and 
later  became  a  teen  club  for  military  dependents.  A  large 
parking  lot  had  been  built  next  to  Jarman  Field.  The  park 
also  contained  a  junior  league  field,  softball  field,  rugby 
field,  athletic  court,  and  tennis  court.  A  sidewalk/ jogging 
trail  curved  around  through  most  of  the  area.  Over  the  next 
10  years,  a  soccer  field,  basketball  court,  fitness  trail, 
and  more  ball  fields  were  added.  The  final  element  of  the 
Fort  Clayton  Community  Park  was  a  jump  tower  (Facility 
173)  installed  across  the  street  from  the  Fort  Clayton 
Elementary  School  (Building  129)  in  the  1990s. 

New  Officers1  Club  (Building  38) 

As  discussed  previously,  the  athletic  and  recreation  schoolhouse  (Building  40)  had 
been  used  as  an  officers’  club  since  1925.  In  March  1928  the  Commanding  Officer  of 
Fort  Clayton  requested  permission  from  the  Commanding  General  of  the  Panama 
Canal  Department  to  construct  an  “assembly  room”  (an  officers’  dub)  on  the  post 
due  to  the  unsuitability  of  the  schoolhouse  location.40  Permission  was  granted,  and 
construction  of  the  new  building  was  begun  on  8  June  1928  and  completed  on  10 
June  1929. 

The  Fort  Clayton  Officers’  Club  was  a  wood-sided  building  with  an  asbestos  shingle 
roof  [3.62,  3.63] .  Enlisted  personnel  from  Fort  Clayton  provided  construction  labor. 


3-32 


[3.62]  Fort  Clayton  Officers'  Club,  Building  38. 


[3.63]  The  Fort  Clayton  Military  Police  motorcy¬ 
cle  patrol  in  front  of  Officers'  Club. 


The  main  building  measured  112  x  55  ft,  and  an  11  x  12  ft  wing  was  added  in  Octo¬ 
ber  1933.  The  wing  served  as  private  quarters  for  employees  of  the  club.  In  1933  the 
floor  plan  of  the  club  included  an  octagonal  foyer,  a  reading  room,  two  servants’ 
rooms,  a  refreshment  room,  and  a  ballroom  with  an  adjacent  orchestra  pit. 

The  officers /  club  at  Fort  Clayton  was  demolished  around 
1980  and  not  replaced. 

Enlisted  Men ’s  Service  Club  (Building 39) 

The  emphasis  on  recreation  activities  and  facilities  in  the  Canal  Zone  dated  back  to 
1906  when  President  Theodore  Roosevelt  appointed  a  group  of  Army  chaplains  to 
organize  and  execute  a  morale  program  on  the  isthmus.  This  tasking,  for  which  the 
chaplains  received  $100  per  month,  involved  traveling  “from  community  to  com¬ 
munity  encouraging  the  organization  of  social  and  athletic  groups  and  teams.”41  In 
1914  The  Panama  Canal’s  Bureau  of  Clubs  and  Playgrounds  took  the  lead  in  manag¬ 
ing  recreational  facilities  when  they  began  constructing  Young  Men’s  Christian 


3-33 


Association  (YMCA)  buildings  for  the  use  of  their  civilian  employees  as  well  as  for 
military  personnel.  A  number  of  YMCA  ‘huts’  were  erected  solely  for  military  use 
during  World  War  1.  These  facilities  were  all  of  temporary  wood  frame  construc¬ 
tion,  and  few  survived  past  the  mid-1920s. 

By  1925  the  Panama  Canal  Department  had  taken  full  responsibility  for  providing 
recreation  and  entertainment  for  its  troops.  The  command  established  the  Morale 
Organization,  under  which  were  placed  the  Department  of  Motion  Picture  Services 
and  the  Department  of  Recreation  and  Welfare.  The  first  permanent  recreational 
building  to  be  constructed  for  the  enlisted  men  at  Fort  Clayton  was  Building  39, 
originally  identified  as  the  “service  club.” 

In  November  1933  the  Commanding  General,  PCD,  requested  permission  from  the 
Chief  of  Staff  to  construct  a  permanent  service  club  at  Fort  Clayton  using  PX  funds. 
Permission  was  granted,  the  project  was  announced,  and  bids  were  taken.42 

The  architectural  and  utility  design  contract  was  awarded  to  the  local  firm  of  Wright 
and  Schay,  Architects.43  Gustav  Schay,  the  primary  architect  for  the  project,  had 
incorporated  elements  of  Peruvian,  Spanish,  and  South  American  architecture  and 
adapted  them  to  the  tropical  climate  of  Panama,  and  this  hybrid  became  known  as 
the  Bellavistino  Style  of  architecture.44  It  was  the  Bellavistino  Style  that  Schay  also 
chose  for  Building  39  [3.64,  3.65,  3.66].  The  style  is  identifiable  by  its  asymmetrical 
massing,  multiple  rooflines,  round  arches  supported  by  piers,  and  decorative  grille 
work.  Building  materials  are  typically  white  plaster  or  stucco  exterior  walls,  clay  tile 
roof,  and  a  distinctive  combination  of  stone  and  red  brick  at  the  base  of  the  build¬ 
ing.  For  the  construction  of  the  service  club,  the  stonework  included  dark  gray 
basaltic  stone  from  Cantera  el  Cangrejo,  Panama,  and  light  brown  rhyolite  stone 
from  Ancon  Hill,  Canal  Zone.  The  straight  barrel  Mission  roofing  tile  was  manufac¬ 
tured  by  Grebien  y  Martinz,  the  Panamanian  firm  that  won  the  construction  con¬ 
tract.  Construction  began  on  10  July  1934.45 


3-34 


[3.65]  Street  view  (front)  of  Service  Club, 
Building  39. 


[3.66]  Rear  beer  garden,  Building  39, 1939. 


Located  in  the  recreation  area  immediately  northwest  of  the  swimming  pool,  the 
service  club  was  alternately  referred  to  as  a  “beer  garden  and  restaurant.”  The  origi¬ 
nal  floor  plan  comprised  the  aforementioned  large  open  beer  garden  and  restau¬ 
rant,  including  a  bar,  kitchen,  hall,  storage  room,  office,  and  restrooms.  The  beer 
garden  and  restaurant  were  officially  opened  on  1  November  1934.  The  initial  con¬ 
struction  cost  was  about  $15,500.  In  October  1937  a  42  x  60  ft  rear  wing,  also 
designed  by  Wright  and  Schay,  was  added  to  the  building. 

Building  39  underwent  periodic  minor  rehabilitations  and 
modifications  and  several  changes  in  designation.  In  July 
1952  it  became  a  PX  restaurant  and  beer  garden,  and  by  1968 
it  was  used  as  a  teen  club  with  a  bandstand  and  game  room. 
Finally,  Building  39  served  as  a  day  care  center  until  its 
transfer  to  the  Republic  of  Panama,  at  which  time  it  was 
valued  at  over  $515,000. 


3-35 


Theater  With  Stage 


Motion  pictures  were  the  major  form  of  entertainment  on  post,  and  they  were 
screened  almost  every  evening.  The  auditorium  in  the  HQ  building  (Building  21) 
provided  seating  for  150  to  200  people.  During  the  1920s,  most  featured  films  were 
silent,  with  no  musical  accompaniment.  In  the  late  1920s,  films  with  sound  began  to 
be  played. 

On  23  May  1933  Lieutenant  Colonel  H.  D.  Selton,  Commander  of  the  33rd  Infantry, 
requested  authority  from  the  Adjutant  General  to  construct  a  movie  theater  at  Fort 
Clayton.  Selton  justified  his  request  by  stating  that  “the  building  of  a  theater  at  this 
post  is  imperative,  due  to  the  fact  that  the  present  theater  is  in  the  Administration 
Building  and  will  not  seat  the  attendance  when  the  Second  Field  Artillery  now  at 
Gatun  moves  to  Fort  Clayton  for  station,  on  or  about  August  1933.”46  The  Command¬ 
ing  General,  PCD,  recommended  approval  and  the  Secretary  of  War  concurred. 
Financing  for  the  project  was  provided  in  the  amount  of  $40,000,  appropriated  from 
the  PCD  motion  picture  fund. 

The  design  for  the  theater,  which  would  “be  architecturally  in  harmony  with  the 
new  barracks  at  Fort  Clayton,”  was  executed  by  Wright  and  Schay.47  A  call  for  bids 
went  out,  and  the  responses  were  opened  in  late  November.48  Grebien  y  Martinz 
won  the  construction  contract,  and  Building  49  was  completed  on  17  April  1935,  at  a 
total  cost  of  just  over  $42,000  [3.67,  3.68] . 

Gustav  Schay  designed  Building  49  in  his  distinctive  Bellavistino  Style.  Like  Building 
39,  the  theater  displays  multiple  rooflines,  round  arches  supported  by  piers  in  the 
front  of  the  building,  and  decorative  grille  work.  Unlike  the  service  club,  but  typical 
of  the  style,  the  theater  also  has  a  tower.  Original  building  materials  included  white 
plastered  exterior  walls,  straight  barrel  Mission  clay  tile  roof,  and  the  characteristic 
Bellavistino  combination  of  stone  and  red  brick  at  the  base  of  the  building.  Seating 
capacity  at  the  time  of  construction  was  1090.  Original  equipment  included  RCA 


[3.67]  Building  49,  Fort  Clayton  Theatre. 


3-36 


[3.68]  Northeast  elevation  of  Theater  (30  September  1934). 


Victor  sound  equipment,  Super  Simplex  projectors  manufactured  by  the  Interna¬ 
tional  Projector  Corporation  of  New  York  City,  and  seats  produced  by  the  American 
Seating  Company. 

In  1954 ,  the  original  large  screen  windows  on  the  side  ele-  [3.69]  Theatre  #1  undergoing  rehabilitation  for 

vations  were  removed  and  solid  walls  constructed  to  accom-  air  conditioning  (c.  1954). 


modate  air  conditioning  [3.69] .  A  marquee  was 
added  to  the  front  of  the  theater  in  1957, 
and  in  1971  alterations  were  made  to  the 
lobby  area.  Major  repairs  were  made  to  the 
building  in  1985. 

World  Shrinks,  Insecurity  Grows 

By  the  mid-1930s  advances  in  naval  aviation  (primarily  aircraft 
carriers)  and  increasingly  long-range  bombers  had  in  effect 
made  Canal  Zone  air  defenses  obsolete.  A  growing  sense  of 
insecurity  about  Canal  Zone  defenses  was  made  more  urgent 
as  dictatorships  in  both  the  eastern  and  western  hemispheres 
became  increasingly  belligerent  and  expansionistic.  The 
clouds  of  war  were  thickening  across  the  seas— two  oceans 
that  had  been  knitted  into  one  by  the  Panama  Canal  [3.70]. 


[3.70]  Panoramic  view  of  Fort  Clayton  and  Miraflores  Locks,  1936. 


Notes  for  Chapter  3 

1  Goodwin,  Historic  Context ,  Vol.  I,  75-77, 
207-208. 

2  Panama  Canal  Department  Historical 
Section,  History  of  the  Panama  Canal  Depart¬ 
ment  (n.p.,  1949),  Vol.  1,  Introduction  and 
Historical  Background  1903-1939,  48; 

Charles  J.  Sullivan,  Army  Posts  &  Towns:  The 
Baedeker  of  the  A rmy  (Burlington:  Free  Press 
Printing  Company,  1926),  9. 

3  Major  B.G.  Chynoweth,  “A  Tour  of  Duty  in 
Panama,”  Infantry  Journal  26  (April  1925), 
376. 

4  Ibid. 

5  James  H.  Sauer,  interviewed  by  author, 
Owensboro,  KY,  5  February  2000. 

6  Ibid. 

7  James  H.  Sauer,  interview  with  author,  5  Feb¬ 
ruary  2000. 

8  “Historical  Study  On  Sabotage:  Transit 
Guard,  Lock  Guard,  Utility  Guard”  (Quarry 
Heights,  CZ:  Panama  Canal  Department, 
1945),  USARSO  History  Office  files,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD,  5-8. 

9  Sullivan,  Charles,  Army  Posts  &  Towns:  The 
Baedeker  of  the  Army  (1926),  10. 

10  Chaplain  Dudley  R.  Tierney,  “Recreation  in 
Tropical  Panama,”  Infantry  Journal  26  (April 
1925),  402;  “Useful  Canal  Zone  Information,” 
Infantry  Journal  26  (April  1925),  443;  George 


Chevalier,  “Memories  of  the  Early  Years  of 
Fort  Clayton,  Panama  Canal  Zone,”  Unpub¬ 
lished  manuscript,  1999;  Jean  Sadler  Heald, 
Picturesque  Panama,  (Chicago:  Curt  Teich 
and  Company,  1928),  10. 

11  AG  Historical  Branch,  Military  Personnel 
(Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  United  States  Army 
Caribbean,  1948),  USARSO  History  Office 
files,  National  Archives  and  Records  Admin¬ 
istration,  College  Park,  MD,  165. 

12  Sauer,  interview. 

13  Ibid. 

14  Journal  of  the  United  States  Artillery,  Volume 
HI,  No.  1, 30  January  1920. 

1 5  Heald,  Picturesque  Panama,  11,71. 

16  Ibid.,  37-38,  45-46. 

17  Michele  Labrut,  Getting  to  Know  Panama 
(Panama,  Republic  of  Panama:  Focus  Publi¬ 
cations  Int.,  S.A.,  1993),  87. 

18  McCullough,  Path  Between  the  Seas,  111-112. 

19  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the 
Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal 
Year  Ended  June  30,  1936  (Washington,  DC: 
GPO,  1936),  110;  Heald,  Picturesque  Panama , 
41-42. 

20  Letter  from  Major  General  H.G.  Bishop,  Chief 
of  Field  Artillery,  Washington,  DC,  to  The 
Adjutant  General,  Washington,  DC,  20  March 
1931,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of 
Engineers,  Construction  Completion  Reports 
1917-1943,  Box  676,  470.2  Panama  Canal 
Department,  National  Archives  and  Records 


Administration,  College  Park,  MD;  Letter 
from  Major  General  Preston  Brown, 
Commander,  Panama  Canal  Department  to 
The  Adjutant  General,  Washington,  DC,  29 
July  1931,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the 
Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943,  Box  676,  Folder:  470.2 
Panama  Canal  Department,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

21  Bishop,  letter  to  The  Adjutant  General,  20 
March  1931. 

22  “Construction  Report  Covering  the  Construc¬ 
tion  of  Barracks  &  Quarters  for  the  2nd  Field 
Artillery  at  Fort  Clayton,  C.Z.,”  Record  Group 
77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construc¬ 
tion  Completion  Reports  1917-1943,  Box  67, 
Claremont  Terminal  to  Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol. 
1,  National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD. 

23  “Completion  Report  Covering  Two  Sets  of 
Field  Officers’  Quarters  at  Fort  Clayton,  C.Z.,” 
Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engi¬ 
neers,  Construction  Completion  Reports 
1917-1943,  Box  67,  Claremont  Terminal  to 
Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1,  National  Archives 
and  Records  Administration,  College  Park, 
MD. 

24  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD, 
Vol.  1,  62-63. 

25  Canal  Record,  29  August  1917, 17;  Chynoweth, 
“A  Tour  of  Duty  in  Panama,”  378;  PCD  Histori¬ 
cal  Section,  History  of  the  PCD,  Vol.  1, 62,  65. 

26  Office  of  the  Quartermaster  Completion 
Reports  accompanying  document,  dated  30 


3-38 


June  1928,  2,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the 
Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943,  Box  67,  Claremont  Termi¬ 
nal  to  Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 

College  Park,  MD;  Sauer,  interview. 

27  Quartermaster  Completion  Reports  accom¬ 
panying  document,  30  June  1928, 1-2. 

28  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  US.  Army  Installations 
in  Panama,  127;  Allan  R.  Small,  interview  by 
author,  Fort  Clayton,  Republic  of  Panama,  21 
February  1995. 

29  U.S.  Navy,  Bureau  of  Yards  and  Docks,  Build¬ 
ing  the  Navy’s  Bases  in  World  War  II:  History 
of  the  Bureau  of  Yards  and  Docks  and  the 
Civil  Engineer  Corps,  1940-1946  (Washing¬ 
ton,  DC:  GPO,  1947),  Vol.  1,  323-325. 

30  Voss,  “The  Army  Air  Service,”  417. 

31  Ibid.,  417-418. 

32  Although  several  sources  suggest  that  there 
may  have  been  a  second  runway  between 
the  original  easternmost  row  of  buildings 
and  the  canal,  the  authors  could  find  no  cor¬ 
roborating  documentary  evidence  of  this. 

33  Letter  from  W.J.  Douglas,  Engineer  of  Mainte¬ 
nance,  The  Panama  Canal  to  Major  Alfred  L. 
Ganahl,  Commanding  Officer,  Military  Survey 
of  Panama,  Corozal,  CZ,  19  March  1919, 
Record  Group  185,  Records  of  The  Panama 
Canal,  1914-1950,  Box  383,  Folder  3,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 

College  Park,  MD. 

34  Sauer,  interview. 


35  Michael  A.  Pedrotty,  Julie  L.  Webster, 

Gordon  L.  Cohen,  and  Aaron  R.  Chmiel, 
“Historical  and  Architectural  Overview  of 
Military  Aircraft  Hangars,”  U.S.  Army 
ERDC/CERL  Technical  Report  TR  98/105 
(Langley  Air  Force  Base,  VA:  Headquarters, 
U.S.  Air  Force  Air  Combat  Command,  Sep¬ 
tember  1999),  2-7. 

36  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD, 
Vol.  1,  69. 

37  Letter  from  Brigadier  General  0.  Westover,  Air 
Corps,  Assistant  Chief  of  the  Air  Corp  to  Chief 
of  the  Air  Corps,  Washington,  DC,  4  April 
1933;  Record  Group  407,  Office  of  the 
Adjutant  General  Central  Files  1926-1939;  Box 
2990,  Fort  Clark  to  Fort  Clayton;  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 

College  Park,  MD;  “Completion  Report  Cover¬ 
ing  the  Construction  of  Stables  (Bldgs 
100-111)  for  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  Battalion 
at  Fort  Clayton,  C.Z,”  26  September  1934, 39, 
Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engi¬ 
neers,  Construction  Completion  Reports 
1917-1943,  Box  67,  Claremont  Terminal  to  Fort 
Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1,  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

38  Plans  and  Property  Branch,  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  “Building  Informa¬ 
tion  Schedule,  as  of  31  March  1982”  (Corozal, 
Panama:  Directorate  of  Engineering  and 
Housing,  United  States  Army  Garrison- 
Panama,  1982),  6. 

39  Pedrotty,  Webster,  Cohen,  and  Chmiel,  “Mili¬ 
tary  Aircraft  Hangars,”  2-7. 

40  Memorandum  from  Commanding  Officer, 
Fort  Clayton  to  Commanding  General, 


Panama  Canal  Department,  1928,  Record 
Group  407,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  General 
Central  Files  1926-1939;  Box  2990,  Fort  Clark 
to  Fort  Clayton,  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

41  AG  Historical  Branch,  Military  Personnel, 
162-163. 

42  Memorandum  from  unknown  to  Chief  of 
Staff,  Supply  Division,  Washington,  DC;  1 
November  1933,  Record  Group  407,  Office  of 
the  Adjutant  General  Central  Files 

1926- 1939; Box  2990,  Fort  Clark  to  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton,  National  Archives  and  Records  Adminis¬ 
tration,  College  Park,  MD;  Letter  from  George 
A.  Lockhart,  Captain,  33d  Infantry,  Post 
Exchange  Officer,  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone 
to  The  Panama  Canal,  9  July  1934;  Record 
Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers, 
Construction  Completion  Reports  1917-1943, 
Box  67,  Claremont  Terminal  to  Fort  Clayton, 
CZ,  Vol.  1,  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

43  The  primary  architect  for  the  building  was 
Gustav  (‘Gustavo’)  Schay,  who  was  born  and 
educated  in  Budapest.  In  1919,  following  the 
conclusion  of  the  first  World  War,  Schay  trav¬ 
eled  and  worked  through  the  Americas’  - 
first  to  Argentina,  then  to  Chile,  and  to 
Bolivia,  where  he  worked  as  the  La  Paz 
Municipal  Engineer.  Schay  also  lived  in 
Colombia,  and  was  working  there  when  an 
earthquake  rocked  the  country.  Immediately 
following  the  catastrophe,  Schay  was  placed 
in  charge  of  rebuilding  the  city  of  Cali.  Schay 
moved  to  Panama  City  in  the  Republic  of 
Panama,  and  in  1927  formed  a  partnership 
with  James  Wright,  an  architect  from  the 


3-39 


United  States.  Among  Wright’s  designs  was 
the  Santo  Tomas  Hospital  in  Panama  City. 

44  Richard  Holzer,  interview  by  author,  Panama 
City,  Panama,  11  November  1999;  electronic 
communication  from  Richard  Holzer  to 
author,  22  November  1999. 

45  Fred  M.  Fogle,  Major,  Quartermaster  Corps, 
Post  Quartermaster,  “Completion  Report  cov¬ 
ering  the  construction  of  Service  Club  and 
Utilities  at  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone,”  8  April 
1935, 1-2,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the 


Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943,  Box  67,  Claremont  Termi¬ 
nal  to  Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

46  Record  of  Communication  received  from 
H.D.  Selton,  Lieutenant  Colonel,  33d  Infantry, 
Commanding,  Headquarters,  Fort  Clayton, 

CZ,  to  The  Adjutant  General;  23  May  1933; 
Record  Group  407,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  Gen¬ 
eral  Central  Files  1926-1939;  Box  2990,  Fort 


Clark  to  Fort  Clayton,  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

47  Memorandum  from  unknown  to  Chief  of 
Staff,  War  Department,  General  Staff,  Wash¬ 
ington,  DC;  4  November  1933;  Record  Group 
407,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  General  Central 
Files  1926-1939;  Box  2990,  Fort  Clark  to  Fort 
Clayton,  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

48  The  Panama  American,  16  November  1933. 


3-40 


CHAPTER  4 


Hostilities  on  Two  Horizons  (1936-1941) 


The  Changing  Canal  Defense  Mission 


In  light  of  the  deteriorating  security  situation  in  Europe,  a  sense  of  urgency  began  to 
influence  defense  plans  and  appropriations  in  the  late  1930s.  By  1939  Congress  had 
authorized  $50  million  in  funding  for  improving  canal  defenses.  Because  a  vast 
increase  in  manpower  was  a  key  element  in  this  program,  much  of  the  new  con¬ 
struction  budget  was  dedicated  to  expansion  of  housing  at  existing  bases.  The 
majority  of  the  expansion  program  construction  was  completed  by  early  1942. 

As  always,  the  mission  of  the  Panama  Canal  Department  was  to  keep  the  canal 
open  and  operating.  However,  canal  defense  methods  had  to  be  adapted  to  keep 
pace  with  advances  in  offensive  technology.  Previously,  a  ‘close-in’  defensive  strat¬ 
egy  had  prevailed:  long-range  guns  guarded  the  sea  approaches  to  the  canal,  field 
artillery  protected  those  guns,  and  a  small  ground  force  defended  the  field  artillery 
and  was  prepared  to  delay  any  enemy  landing  until  reinforcements  could  arrive 
from  the  United  States.  With  the  advent  of  long-range  bombers  and  rapid  advances 
in  aircraft  carrier  technology  and  tactics,  the  longstanding  canal  defense  strategy 
needed  a  major  update.  During  the  late  1930s,  a  new  canal  defense  strategy  was 
developed  to  prepare  for  looming  threats  posed  by  attacks  from  the  air. 


The  air  attack  threat  and  others  were  laid  out  in  a  1939  War  Department  “list  of 
expectancy”  that  included  possible  scenarios  for  attacks  that  the  Panama  Canal 
Department  would  have  to  repel  before  reinforcements  could  arrive  [4.01].  Sabo¬ 
tage  through  explosives  placed  in  the  canal,  and  air  bombardment  by  sea  or  land- 
based  planes  led  the  list.1  The  objectives  of  all  these  scenarios  were  basically  the 
same  as  ever:  (1)  to  render  the  canal  unusable  through  damage  caused  by  small 
raiding  parties  or  (2)  to  capture  the  canal  through  a  massive  military  attack  and 
operate  it  for  enemy  advantage.2 

The  plans  developed  by  the  War  Department  and  the  Panama  Canal  Department 
provided  a  line  of  defense  sufficiently  removed  from  the  canal  to  eliminate  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  a  naval-borne  air  force  getting  to  within  striking  distance.  The  area  encom¬ 
passed  by  this  plan  became  known  as  the  Panama  Coastal  Frontier,  and  defending 
it  was  the  responsibility  of  the  Panama  Canal  Department.  Within  this  area  would 
be  (1)  an  extended  defensive  line  to  intercept  ships  and  planes,  (2)  a  “close-in  line 
of  resistance”  to  protect  the  coastline  and  prevent  landings,  and  (3)  a  local  system 
of  “defensive  weapons  and  delaying-positions  in  which  the  final  canal  defense 
actions  would  be  fought.”3  The  ground  forces  of  the  Panama  Canal  Department 
would  be  crucial  to  the  last  two  defense  elements. 

Reorganizing  for  the  Emergency 

In  response  to  the  imminent  certainty  of  open  warfare  in  Europe,  emergency  mea¬ 
sures  for  the  canal  were  initiated  in  the  last  days  of  August  1939.  In  addition  to  troop 


[4.01]  Anti-aircraft  warning  signal  tower 
constructed  at  Fort  Clayton  by  The  Panama 
Canal,  July  1940. 


4-1 


buildup,  these  measures  included  anti-sabotage  activities  and  a  transfer  of  canal 
authority  to  the  U.S.  Army. 

The  Army  garrison  at  Panama  was  given  the  mission  of  “protecting  the  canal  against 
sabotage  and  of  defending  it  from  positions  within  the  Canal  Zone.”4  The  Navy  was 
tasked  to  provide  offshore  defense,  provide  armed  guards  for  ships  transiting  the 
canal,  and  maintain  a  harbor  patrol  at  both  ends  of  the  canal.5  As  early  as  5  Septem¬ 
ber  1939  an  Executive  Order  was  issued  transferring  administrative  jurisdiction  and 
authority  over  the  canal  and  the  Canal  Zone  to  the  Panama  Canal  Department.6  The 
massive  guns  and  batteries  at  both  ends  of  the  canal  were  prepared  for  use.  The  11 
Atlantic  and  12  Pacific  batteries  bristled  with  6-16  in.  guns  boasting  a  firing  range  of 
up  to  25  miles.  To  protect  against  air  attack,  anti-aircraft  batteries  were  put  in  place 
across  the  Canal  Zone,  and  two  anti-aircraft  detachments  were  deployed  in  Septem¬ 
ber  1939.  Two  long-range  radar  stations  were  built  that  autumn.  The  main  runway  at 
Albrook  Field  was  improved  to  handle  the  larger  modern  bombers,  which  began 
arriving  in  June  1939. 

A  new  organization  for  the  Panama  Canal  Department  was  put  in  place  during  Feb¬ 
ruary  1940.  Department  forces  were  divided  into  Department  Troops,  the  Panama 
Mobile  Force  (Provisional),  the  Panama  Separate  Coast  Artillery  Brigade  (Provi¬ 
sional),  and  the  19th  Wing. 

In  1941  the  United  States  took  the  British  possessions  of  Jamaica,  Antigua,  St.  Lucia, 
Trinidad,  and  British  Guyana  into  protective  custody.  Because  all  of  these  islands 
were  considered  potential  military  bases,  this  action  created  the  need  for  a  major 
command  reorganization.  To  administer  the  five  new  U.S.  protectorates  in  the 
Caribbean,  and  to  address  issues  of  command  extent  between  the  various  Army 
and  Navy  forces  in  the  area,  a  new  theater  command  was  established.  The 
Caribbean  Defense  Command  was  officially  activated  on  10  February  1941  under 
the  command  of  General  Daniel  Van  Voorhis,  then  Commander  of  the  Panama 
Canal  Department.  The  Caribbean  Defense  Command  was  initially  set  up  as  strictly 
Army,  and  coordination  with  Navy  operations  was  ordered  by  “mutual  coopera¬ 
tion.”  A  separate  command,  the  Caribbean  Air  Force,  was  established  for  air 
defense  at  about  the  same  time.  On  29  May  1941  General  Van  Voorhis  released  Gen¬ 
eral  Order  Number  8,  which  outlined  the  organization  for  the  Caribbean  Defense 
Command: 

This  Command  was  divided  into  the  Panama  Sector,  comprising  the  Panama 
Canal  Department  (responsible  for  Ecuador,  Colombia  and  Central  America 
south  of  Mexico),  the  Puerto  Rican  Sector  comprising  the  Puerto  Rican  Depart¬ 
ment  (which  was  responsible  for  the  Virgin  Islands,  the  Bahamas  Base  Com¬ 
mand,  the  Jamaica  Base  Command,  and  the  Antigua  Base  Command),  and  the 
Trinidad  Sector  consisting  of  the  Trinidad  Base  Command,  the  St.  Lucia  Base 
Command,  and  the  British  Guiana  Base  Command.  In  addition,  there  was  the 
Caribbean  Air  Force  with  responsibilities  in  all  three  sectors.7 

On  21  May  1941  President  Roosevelt  had  designated  a  state  of  ‘unlimited  emergency’ 
in  the  Canal  Zone;  military  dependents  were  evacuated  to  the  United  States  by  Octo- 


4-2 


ber  8  General  Frank  M.  Andrews  succeeded  General  Van  Voorhis  as  Commander  of 
the  Caribbean  Defense  Command  in  August  1941.  By  that  time  troops  from  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton  had  deployed  to  protective  outposts  to  man  anti-aircraft  artillery,  automatic 
weapons,  and  searchlights,  and  to  provide  security  patrols  at  canal  facilities.  Troop 
strength  in  Panama  rapidly  escalated,  from  13,451  in  1939  to  31,400  by  December 
1941.  At  Fort  Clayton  alone  there  were  147  officers  and  3927  enlisted  men 9 

Canal  Priority  in  the  1939  Defense  Augmentation  Program 

Funding  the  1939  Buildup 

In  June  1939  Congress  began  appropriating  vast  sums  of  money  for  expanding  U.S. 
defenses.  The  potential  vulnerability  of  the  Panama  Canal  was  a  high-priority  con¬ 
cern  because  it  was  considered  vital  for  shipping  defense  supplies  and  troops.  The 
76th  Congress  provided  initial  appropriation  of  $50  million  for  strengthening  Panama 
Canal  defenses  and  for  implementing  the  Air  Corps  Expansion  and  Coast  Artillery 
Augmentation  Programs.  Because  the  bolstering  of  U.S.  defenses  required  a  sharp 
increase  in  troop  strength,  construction  of  housing  and  related  necessary  features 
was  essential.  The  Panama  Canal  Department  was  projected  to  reach  a  mobile  force 
of  23,000,  an  Air  Corps  force  of  5962,  and  a  Coast  Artillery  force  of  9270.  The  most 
pressing  needs  in  the  department  were  for  housing,  training,  and  hospital  facilities, 
but  all  other  necessary  facilities  such  as  supply,  ordnance,  troop  support,  adminis¬ 
tration,  utilities,  and  schools  had  to  be  provided  as  well.  In  addition  to  supplement¬ 
ing  facilities  at  existing  bases,  money  was  provided  to  acquire  land  in  Panama  for 
additional  defensive  sites.  Congressional  funding  for  buildup  purposes  continued 
through  the  remainder  of  the  prewar  period.  Almost  80  percent  of  the  first  construc¬ 
tion  program  was  dedicated  to  housing.10 

Funds  for  the  expansion  program  construction  became  available  on  1  July  1939, 
and  until  December  1941  this  construction  was  carried  out  under  the  Office  of  the 
Constructing  Quartermaster,  Panama  Canal  Department,  with  a  staff  of  about  35. 

Problems  Getting  Started 

Despite  all  the  efforts-both  past  and  contemporary— to  improve  and  standardize 
Army  facility  design,  the  1939  expansion  effort  was  initially  hampered  by  two  fac¬ 
tors:  field  engineers  and  architects  with  no  experience  in  tropical  construction  and 
micromanagement  by  the  War  Department  in  Washington. 

A  group  of  engineers  and  architects  from  the  United  States  arrived  in  the  early  fall  of 
1939.  Their  lack  of  experience  in  tropical  climates  proved  a  great  liability.  Having 
never  experienced  the  torrential  downpours  common  on  the  isthmus,  for  example, 
they  designed  curb  outlets  with  4-6  in.  runoffs  when  12-15  in.  runoffs  were  actually 
necessary.11  Meanwhile,  in  Washington,  progress  was  inhibited  by  the  requirement 
that  all  facility  designs  be  approved  by  the  War  Department.  Washington’s  lack  of 
familiarity  with  the  tropics  in  general,  and  with  Panama  in  particular,  produced 
many  designs  that  needed  significant  revision  before  they  could  be  used  in  the 
field. 


4-3 


Some  plans  reached  the  isthmus  before  such  details  as  fireplaces  and  heating  plant 
installations  were  deleted.  Practically  all  plans  that  came  from  Washington  included 
the  use  of  glass  windows  to  an  extent  unnecessary  in  the  tropics.  At  one  time,  plans 
designed  for  Puerto  Rico  were  sent  to  this  Department.  Rejection  was  based  on  the 
cost  factor.  In  Puerto  Rico,  construction  is  designed  to  resist  winds  of  hurricane 
velocity,  whereas  in  Panama  violent  winds  are  unknown  and  severe  wind  storms 
are  of  short  duration.12 

Calls  for  construction  bids  were  delayed  until  March  1940  due  to  disagreements  in 
Washington  over  what  type  of  construction  contracts  should  be  let.  The  first  con¬ 
tractors  did  not  reach  the  isthmus  until  July  1940.  In  the  meantime,  troop  labor  was 
used  to  clear  construction  sites  and  put  in  footings.  The  housing  shortage  was  espe¬ 
cially  acute  because  new  troops  began  arriving  in  the  Canal  Zone  about  the  same 
time  that  construction  got  underway.  It  was  essential  to  get  men  and  materiel  out  of 
tents  and  into  buildings  as  quickly  as  possible. 

Once  begun,  the  actual  construction  was  reasonably  swift.  The  scope  of  the  job 
was  tremendous,  though,  and  every  available  soldier  was  detailed  to  some  aspect 
of  construction.  The  use  of  troops  enabled  the  contractors  to  ‘hit  the  ground  run¬ 
ning’  but  it  created  chaos  with  troop  training  schedules.  Even  so,  essential  training 
was  not  neglected.  Every  effort  was  made  to  familiarize  “green”  personnel  with 
their  weapons  and  defense  missions.  This  end  was  partially  achieved  by  staging 
repeated  alerts  during  the  workday.  At  the  sounding  of  an  alert,  artillerymen  work¬ 
ing  on  the  roofs  of  their  partially  completed  hutments  would  slide  to  the  ground 
and  race  to  their  weapons.  After  brief  exercises  the  soldiers  would  return  to  their 
construction  work.13 

Due  to  the  extreme  time  constraints,  much  of  the  new  construction  was  intended  to 
be  temporary  only.  Standard  building  plans  would  be  used,  but  substitutions  often 
would  be  made  to  best  exploit  the  materials  that  were  on  hand.  Inexpensive  materi¬ 
als  were  substituted  where  feasible  and  construction  methods  were  modified  to 
reduce  labor  costs.  Designs  were  stripped  down  to  essentials,  and  all  ornamental 
details  were  eliminated.  Temporary  structures  were  inherently  less  durable,  and 
were  often  meant  to  be  easily  disassembled  and  re-erected  elsewhere  [4.02], 

Impact  of  the  “Third  Locks  Project” 

Another  huge  construction  project  in  progress  at  this  time  concerned  the  capacity 
of  the  Panama  Canal.  As  both  the  size  and  number  of  ships  transiting  the  canal 
increased,  Congress  authorized  the  construction  of  an  additional  set  of  locks  in 
1939.  Known  as  the  “Third  Locks  Project,”  new,  larger  locks  would  be  constructed 
near  the  existing  ones  at  Gatun,  Pedro  Miguel,  and  Miraflores  to  increase  capacity. 
Excavation  at  the  Pacific  approach  channel  to  the  new  Miraflores  lock  was  begun 
on  1  July  1940,  at  approximately  the  same  time  the  military  construction  program 
was  gathering  steam.  A  severe  labor  shortage  resulted  as  both  programs  competed 
for  construction  personnel.  The  U.S.  entry  into  the  war  changed  priorities,  and  in 
mid-1942  the  Navy  postponed  indefinitely  the  construction  of  the  large  battleships 
that  would  require  the  new  locks.  This  effectively  ended  the  Third  Locks  Project. 


4-4 


[4.02]  Temporary  tent  quarters  for  officers, 
1941. 


“Upon  arriving  at  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton  in  November  of  1941, 1 
was  assigned  ‘quarters’  in 
Tent  No.  19.  With  orders  in 
hand  I  moved  down  the 
sidewalk  past  the  Bachelor 
Officers’  Quarters,  admiring 
the  beautiful,  two-story 
apartment  buildings  where 
quarters  were  shared  by 
from  two  to  four  officers, 
and  enviously  contemplated 
my  future  move  into  them. 
Then  I  came  to  the  end  of 
the  sidewalk.  No  more  beau¬ 
tiful  buildings.  Nothing  but 
tents,  two  officers  per 
each.” 

Arthur  R.  Datnoff,  Colonel, 

U.S.  Army  (Retired)14 


The  Construction  Program 

Design  Modernization  and  Improvement 

With  enough  funds  available  to  modernize  building  standards,  much  thought  was 
invested  in  improving  current  designs-especially  for  enhanced  performance  in  the 
tropics.  Several  new  design  features  characterized  this  period  of  construction  at 
Fort  Clayton.  One  major  improvement  was  ridge  ventilation,  which  provided  a  dis¬ 
tinct  improvement  over  standard  gable  ventilation  systems.  Ridge  ventilation 
allowed  a  constant  outflow  of  hot  air  along  the  entire  length  of  the  roof. 

To  further  enhance  ventilation  control,  virtually  all  original  exterior  screened  doors 
and  windows  were  outfitted  with  jalousies— adjustable  louvered  windows  with  hori¬ 
zontal  slats.  Jalousies  were  popular  throughout  the  isthmus  despite  the  fact  that 
they  shut  out  light  along  with  the  wind  and  rain  [4.03] .  After  much  experimentation, 
two  types  of  jalousies  were  favored:  a  basic  version,  which  was  essentially  a  slatted 
blind  with  a  center  adjustment  rod;  and  the  “Miami”  type,  which  incorporated  hard¬ 
ware  slides  and  crank-action  handles  that  allowed  adjustment  to  any  desired  inter¬ 
mediate  angle.  While  the  Miami  type  was  functionally  preferable,  the  Panama  Canal 
Department  shops  produced  large  quantities  of  the  simple,  low-cost  version  for  use 
on  post.15 

Also  during  this  period,  to  help  win  the  never-ending  battle  to  protect  personal 
property  from  the  voracious  tropical  mold  and  mildew,  electric  dehumidifiers 
began  finding  a  place  in  Canal  Zone  dry  closets. 

Another  key  design  change  implemented  during  this  period  certainly  was  not 
unique  to  the  Canal  Zone.  In  fact,  the  surprising  thing  is  that  it  was  adopted  at  such 


[4.03]  Typical  style  of  aluminum  jalousies  used 
in  Canal  Zone  Army  construction,  28  December 
1950. 


4-5 


a  late  date.  The  installation  of  hot  water  systems  (besides  kitchen  facilities)  in  all 
Panama  Canal  Department  housing  was  a  product  of  this  construction  effort.  Previ¬ 
ously  water  provided  by  the  utility  system  had  typically  been  delivered  to  the  user 
at  room  temperature,  which  was  not  physically  uncomfortable  for  bathing  in  the 
tropical  climate.  However,  when  hot  water  systems  were  widely  implemented  in 
Canal  Zone  baths  and  laundry  facilities  there  was  a  marked  decrease  in  fungal  skin 
infections.16 

Expansion  Program  Residential  Construction 

A  portion  of  the  $50  million  1939  appropriation  for  canal  defense  was  earmarked  for 
new  construction  at  Fort  Clayton.  The  number  of  troops  stationed  at  Fort  Clayton 
rapidly  rose  from  mid-1980s  levels,  increasing  from  63  officers  and  2117  enlisted 
men  in  December  1934  to  93  officers  and  3543  enlisted  men  in  December  1939.  In 
addition  to  the  infantry  brigade,  members  of  the  Quartermaster  Train  and  detach¬ 
ments  of  Engineer  Corps,  Signal  Corps,  Field  Artillery  Medical  Corps,  and  Quarter¬ 
master  Corps  were  moved  to  Fort  Clayton.  The  initial  expansion  plans  for  Fort 
Clayton  included  new  facilities  for  the  Panama  Signal  Company  33rd  Infantry 
Machine  Gun  Company  1st  Chemical  Company  Post  Detachment,  Headquarters 
and  Headquarters  Company  and  the  33rd  Infantry  Band.17 

Other  new  housing  planned  under  the  prewar  expansion  program  included  new 
officers’  quarters  and  a  block  of  quarters  for  NCOs,  which  were  built  in  the  north¬ 
west  area  of  the  installation.  Many  of  these  quarters  were  constructed  of  reinforced 
concrete,  stucco,  and  red  Spanish  tile  like  similar  structures  on  post,  but  others 
were  built  in  a  more  temporary  manner  with  similar  designs  executed  in  wood.18 

Engineer  Quadrangle  Barracks  and  the  Origins  of  Soldier’s  Field 

When  plans  were  being  made  to  relocate  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  to  Fort  Clayton  in 
1930-1931,  the  future  location  of  the  11th  Engineers  was  discussed  as  well.  It  was 
considered  a  good  idea  to  keep  the  engineers  as  close  as  possible  to  the  troops 
they  supported,  so  the  11th  Engineers  were  also  relocated  to  Fort  Clayton.  Due  to 
the  scarcity  of  Depression-era  funds,  however,  the  construction  required  to  sup¬ 
port  this  move  had  to  be  executed  in  two  steps.  Emergency  Relief  funds  were 
appropriated  for  the  War  Department  for  1935-1937  and  used  to  build  two  barracks 
(Buildings  126  and  127)  for  the  11th  Engineers.  Novey  &  Lutrell,  of  Ancon,  Canal 
Zone,  was  the  general  contractor  for  construction.  The  Quartermaster  construc¬ 
tion  office  drew  up  the  plans.  Work  began  in  July  1936  and  the  barracks  were  com¬ 
pleted  by  June  1937  at  a  cost  of  $300,000.  This  cost  included  the  construction  of 
sidewalks,  roads,  and  necessary  utilities,  including  four  streetlights.  All  materials 
used  came  from  the  United  States  except  sand,  stone,  wall  tile,  and  roofing  tile,  all 
of  which  were  available  in  Panama.  A  transformer  house  was  built  between  the 
two  barracks.19 

The  barracks  were  sited  in  a  line  perpendicular  to  the  southeast  end  of  the  2nd  Field 
Artillery  Barracks  (Building  95),  on  the  open  fill  area  northwest  of  the  infantry  area. 
Facing  in  toward  Building  95,  these  barracks  began  to  define  what  would  become 


4-6 


[4.04]  11th  Engineers  barracks  (Buildings  127 
and  126),  right,  with  beer  garden  (Building  39) 
at  left. 


Soldier’s  Field,  the  installation’s  central  quadrangle  for  the  remainder  of  the  cen¬ 
tury.  Designed  to  accommodate  one  engineer  company  (130-150  men),  the  three- 
story  buildings  employed  the  same  materials  and  design  techniques  as  the  other 
barracks  on  post,  with  concrete  frame  construction  on  raised  concrete  piers,  con¬ 
crete  block  walls,  large  screened  openings,  overhanging  tile  roofs,  and  mediaguas 
on  intermediate  floors.  On  the  first  floor,  concrete  block  walls  extended  halfway  up 
the  exterior.  Each  building  measured  61  x  141  ft  and  was  identical  to  its  mate.  With  a 
few  variations,  this  basic  design  was  adopted  for  all  barracks  subsequently  built  at 
Fort  Clayton  [4.04,  4.05] . 

The  first  floor  of  each  of  these  buildings  comprised  a  mess  hall  and  kitchen,  cook’s 
quarters,  store  room,  offices,  a  dayroom,  barber,  tailor,  and  issue  room.  Exterior 
doors  and  stairs  to  the  ground  level  were  placed  at  the  mess  hall  and  both  ends  of 
the  dayroom.  The  second  and  third  floors  each  housed  two  squad  rooms,  with  NCO 
quarters  in  each  corner  and  bath  facilities  and  dry  rooms  in  the  center.  The  attic 
contained  a  storeroom. 


Construction  of  the  remainder  of  the  11th  Engineer  Regiment’s  barracks  would  have 
to  wait  until  more  funding  was  available. 


Completion  of  Soldier’s  Field  Area  Housing  and  Engineer 
Headquarters  Barracks 

A  bill  to  authorize  the  appropriation  of  up  to  $1.6  million  for  the 
construction  of  barracks,  quarters,  stables,  gun  sheds,  garages, 
and  a  waste  incinerator  at  Fort  Clayton  was  introduced  to  Con¬ 
gress  on  22  January  1936.  The  Military  Appropriation  Act  of 
1939  reduced  this  amount  to  $828,000  on  11  June  1938.  Funding 
for  the  barracks,  amounting  to  $650,000,  was  released  immedi¬ 
ately.  The  remainder  won  approval  the  following  year.  The 
Office  of  the  Department  Quartermaster,  Panama  Canal  Depart¬ 
ment,  prepared  plans  for  the  construction  project.  Robert  E. 


[4.05]  Interior  of  barracks. 


4-7 


McKee,  General  Contractor,  of  El  Paso,  Texas, 
won  the  contract  and  began  work  20  January 
1939.  Included  in  the  contract  were  require¬ 
ments  for  water  mains  and  fire  protection, 
storm  sewers,  sanitary  sewers,  roads,  curbs 
and  sidewalks,  electric  distribution  and  street 
lighting,  grading,  and  pre-cast  concrete  drains. 

The  project  was  completed  by  20  March  1940 
at  a  cost  of  just  under  $581,000.20 

Standard  Barracks.  Construction  of  these 
barracks  completed  the  quadrangle  begun 
with  Buildings  95,  126,  and  127  and  finalized 
the  enclosure  of  the  new  parade  ground  that 
would  become  known  as  Soldier’s  Field 
[4.06].  Over  the  years  Soldier’s  Field  was  the  location  of  many  formal  military 
observances,  culminating  with  the  USARSO  departure  ceremony  on  30  July  1999. 


[4.06]  11th  Engineers  regimental  barracks 
(Buildings  128, 130-132),  4  June  1940. 


Four  of  the  five  new  barracks  were  designed  along  lines  similar  to  the  earlier  bar¬ 
racks,  and  their  exteriors  were  closely  matched.  Like  the  previous  barracks,  these 
were  three-story,  concrete  frame  structures  which  were  being  described  by  this 
point  as  “standard  type  of  barracks  for  the  Canal  Zone.”21  In  fact,  standard  barracks 
designs  created  in  the  fall  of  1939  were  based  on  these  structures.  The  proven  con¬ 
struction  design  of  stuccoed  concrete  block  walls  with  wide  screened  openings, 
mediaguas,  and  overhanging  tile  roofs  was  used  again.  The  inward-facing  buildings 
had  the  same  measurements  as  the  first  two  (within  a  few  inches),  with  loading  plat¬ 
forms  built  along  the  rear. 


The  four  standard  barracks  each  held  a  company  of  troops,  about  140-150  men.  The 
first  floor  housed  a  mess  hall,  kitchen,  storeroom,  cook’s  room,  issue  room,  and 
dayroom.  There  were  also  offices  for  NCO,  Company  Officer,  1st  Sergeant,  and 
shops  for  the  tailor  and  barber.  Exterior  openings  off  the  quadrangle  led  upstairs  to 
the  mess  hall  and  dayroom.  An  exterior  opening  was  also  installed  in  the  office  of 
the  Company  Officer.  Interior  stairs  in  the  dayroom  led  upward  to  the  squad  rooms 
on  the  second  and  third  floors.  Each  floor  had  two  squad  rooms  for  32  men  with  an 
NCO  room  in  each  corner  and  dry  rooms  and  toilets  in  the  center. 


Engineer  Regiment  Headquarters  Barracks.  The  fifth  building  was  the  head¬ 
quarters  barracks  for  the  11th  Engineer  Regiment,  Building  129  [4.07,  4.08]. 
Designed  to  house  180  men,  the  building  measured  221  x  61  ft  including  a  loading 
platform  in  the  rear  and  two  wings  on  the  front  that  wrapped  slightly  around  the 
sides.  The  upper  floors  measured  181  x  61  ft.  The  exterior  was  designed  to  match  up 
well  with  Building  95,  which  it  faced  across  the  quadrangle.  The  central  entrance 
was  completely  encased  in  a  massive  surround  of  concrete  that  was  echoed  to  a 
smaller  extent  on  the  two  wing  entrances. 


The  main  block  of  the  first  floor  held  two  dayrooms  separated  by  an  issue  room,  toi¬ 
let,  and  barber  shop.  The  kitchen,  cook’s  room,  and  storeroom  occupied  one  end 


4-8 


[4.07]  Building  129, 11th  Engineers  administra¬ 
tion  building. 


[4.08]  11th  Engineers  officers  in  front  of  their 
Headquarters  Building  (Building  129),  1942. 
“The  captain,  second  man  from  left  sitting,  is 
Andy  Goodpaster,  who  became  a  4-star  General. 
All  the  11th  vets  are  proud  of  him.”-Robert  H. 
Tippett,  2000. 


and  the  other  contained  two  large  offices.  The  north  wing  had  rooms  for  NCO,  1st 
Sergeant,  and  Company  Officer.  The  south  wing  provided  office  space  for  the  Com¬ 
manding  Officer  and  the  Adjutant.  There  were  exterior  doors  at  each  wing  and  in 
the  center.  Interior  stairs  in  the  dayrooms  led  upward  to  the  two  40-man  squad 
rooms  on  the  second  floor  with  corner  NCO  rooms  and  central  dry  rooms  and  toi¬ 
let.  The  third  floor  repeated  the  arrangement  on  the  second  floor. 

In  1962 ,  Building  129  underwent  a  complete  remodeling  for 
its  conversion  into  the  Clayton  Elementary  School.  The 
students  on  post  had  been  bused  to  various  Canal  Zone 
schools  over  the  years.  The  establishment  of  an  elementary 
school  within  Fort  Clayton  enabled  the  students  to  stay  on 


4-9 


post.  The  interior  of  the  building  was  converted  to  meet 
the  requirements  of  an  educational  facility.  The  first  floor 
received  classrooms,  a  clinic,  teachers'  lounge, 
principal's  office,  library,  music  and  audio-visual  rooms, 
and  a  kindergarten  room.  A  small  air  conditioning  system 
cooled  the  music  room,  audio-visual  room,  and  a  special 
education  classroom.  Window  units  supplemented  this  system 
on  the  first  floor.  The  interior  stairs  were  rebuilt  to 
accommodate  the  shorter  stride  of  children.  The  second  and 
third  floors  had  classrooms  and  toilets.  The  exterior 
screened  openings  were  replaced  with  either  aluminum  frame 
glass  awning  or  jalousie  windows.  A  concrete  canopy  was 
installed  behind  the  building  to  cover  the  students  from 
the  back  door  to  the  street. 

A  play  shelter  was  constructed  in  1966.  Located  across 
the  street  behind  the  school,  it  contained  a  volleyball/ 
basketball  court  with  concrete  block  and  screened  exterior 
walls.  An  enclosed  area  housed  an  office,  dry  room,  and 
toilets.  The  entire  school  building  was  centrally  air  con¬ 
ditioned  in  1967  with  the  addition  of  a  chiller  plant  next 
to  the  building.  A  1988  renovation  upgraded  the  plumbing, 
wiring,  and  air  conditioning  systems.  As  part  of  this  pro¬ 
ject,  the  first  floor  windows  were  replaced  with  smaller 
fixed  sash  windows  with  security  bars. 

The  “New  Post” Barracks 

As  stated  previously,  the  11th  Engineer  barracks  was  adopted  as  the  model  for  sub¬ 
sequent  barracks  construction.  As  part  of  the  expansion  construction  program,  20 
additional  barracks  were  erected  at  Fort  Clayton  by  the  end  of  1941.  The  same  type 
structures  were  built  at  other  installations  in  the  Canal  Zone  too,  including  Albrook 
and  Howard  Fields.  These  barracks  were  planned  as  standard  designs  in  three 
sizes:  100-man,  150-man,  and  200-man  barracks.  The  Office  of  the  Constructing 
Quartermaster,  PCD,  created  plans  for  the  barracks.  Construction  was  contracted  to 
the  firm  of  McClure,  Thompson,  and  Markham.  The  buildings  were  placed  in  two 
groups,  one  set  of  three  (Buildings  154,  155,  and  156)  behind  the  southeastern-most 
of  the  1920  infantry  battalion  barracks  (Building  22)  and  the  remaining  17  on  the 
northwest  edge  of  the  filled  area,  beyond  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  stables.  The  three- 
barracks  group  was  constructed  for  the  machine  gun  companies,  33rd  Infantry,  at  a 
cost  of  almost  $290,000.  Building  them  required  the  demolition  of  Building  40  (the 
guardhouse)  and  an  existing  tennis  court.  The  plans  for  these  barracks  were  only 
slightly  changed  from  the  standard  150-man  barracks  derived  from  the  11th  Engineer 
barracks  design  and  were  the  same  dimensions,  measuring  141  x  61  ft.  Buildings 
154-156  were  designed  with  taller  concrete  pillars  on  the  ground  floor.  This  modifi¬ 
cation  made  it  practical  to  enclose  the  ground  floors,  thereby  providing  additional 
space.  On  the  first  floor,  the  tailor  shop  was  left  out  and  gun  locker  room,  equip¬ 
ment  room,  and  workshop  were  added  instead.22 


4-10 


Due  to  both  its  size  and  its  distance  from  the  existing 
barracks,  the  17-barracks  group  became  a  self-con¬ 
tained  entity  on  the  installation  constructed  for  the 
Coast  Artillery.  Maps  from  the  period  even  refer  to 
this  cluster  of  buildings  as  the  “New  Post.”  The  build¬ 
ings  were  arranged  in  a  sort  of  rounded  rectangular 
manner,  all  facing  inward  toward  a  parade  ground 
that  doubled  as  a  recreation/training  area.  The 
ensemble  even  had  its  own  headquarters  building 
(Building  200).  Construction  of  the  barracks  was  con¬ 
tracted  to  McClure,  Thompson,  and  Markham.  They 
were  completed  in  December  1941,  at  a  cost  of  $1.4 
million  [4.09]  J 23 


The  New  Post  development  hosted  all  three  sizes  of 
barracks.  There  were  three  200-man  (Buildings  201, 

218,  and  220),  three  150-man  (Buildings  202,  203,  and 
205),  and  eleven  100-man  (Buildings  204,  207,  208, 

210-15,  217,  219)  [4.10,  4.11].  Apart  from  size,  the  100- 

and  200-man  barracks  were  practically  the  same  as  the  150-man  barracks  (the  first 
to  be  designed).  Building  materials  and  construction  design  remained  the  same. 
The  100-man  barracks  design  was  shorter  but  no  less  wide,  measuring  121  x  61  ft. 
The  first  floor  contained  a  kitchen,  cook’s  room,  cold  storage,  kitchen  store  room, 
mess  hall,  issue  room,  dayroom,  store  room,  NCO  room,  barber,  toilet,  officer’s 
room,  and  1st  Sergeant’s  room.  Exterior  entrances  led  into  the  mess  hall  and  day- 
room.  The  second  and  third  floors  contained  squad  rooms.  One  squad  room  for  32 
men  took  up  nearly  half  the  floor  space;  the  remainder  was  utilized  for  the  central 
toilet  facilities  and  a  16-man  squad  room.  An  NCO  room  occupied  each  corner. 


[4.09]  Aerial  view  of  U.S.  Army  Coast  Artillery 
Area,  later  known  as  U.S.  Army  Garrison  Area 
(200  Barracks  Area). 


The  200-man  barracks  was  significantly  longer  (201  x  61  ft)  but  had  the  same  width 
as  the  others.  The  increased  length  allowed  for  larger  individual  rooms  on  the  first 
floor  and  included  two  extra  dry  rooms.  Otherwise,  room  function  was  the  same. 
The  second  and  third  floors  each  contained  two  48-man  squad  rooms  with  NCO 
rooms  in  each  corner,  and  central  toilet  and  dry  room  facilities. 


Noncommissioned  Officers’ Club 

The  NCO  Club  (Building  153)  was  actually  based  on  a  standard  plan  for  a  band  bar¬ 
racks.  Built  in  1941  at  a  cost  of  $55,000,  the  design  followed  the  standard  plan  for 
“Band  Barracks,  48  Man,”  which  was  designed  by  the  Office  of  the  Constructing 
Quartermaster,  Panama  Canal  Department.  The  rectangular  two-story  building 
shared  the  common  characteristics  of  barracks  construction  at  Fort  Clayton,  except 
on  a  smaller  scale:  concrete  block  walls  covered  with  stucco,  wide  screened  open¬ 
ings,  a  raised  first  floor,  mediaguas,  and  Spanish  tile.  The  building  measured  121  x 
41  ft  and  had  a  rear  loading  dock. 

Entry  to  the  first  floor  was  through  a  door  into  the  dayroom  and  one  into  the  band 
practice  room.  The  floor  also  contained  a  library  and  composing  room,  orderly 


4-11 


REAR  ELEVATION 


END  ELEVATION 


CONTRACTOR  TO  VERIFY  ALL  DIMENSIONS  ON  THE.  JOB 


[4.11]  Front  Rear,  and  End  Elevations,  Standard  Barracks,  100  Men. 


room,  office,  storeroom,  repair  room,  issue  room,  six  dry  closets,  orchestra  and 
practice  room,  toilet,  and  NCO  room.  One  set  of  interior  stairs  led  upward  from  the 
center  front.  The  second  floor  served  as  the  48-man  squad  room  with  two  NCO 
rooms  in  the  north  corners  and  a  dry  room,  laundry,  and  toilet  at  the  other  end. 

In  1961  the  NCO  club  was  modernized.  The  ground  floor  was 
enclosed  by  this  time  and  there  were  walkways  and  ramps  in 
place.  The  ground  floor  contained  storage  and  offices,  as 
well  as  the  main  bar,  a  game  room,  and  toilet.  The 
restaurant,  kitchen,  and  foyer  were  located  on  the  first 
floor.  The  second  floor  held  the  ballroom  with  a  bandstand, 
bar,  and  toilet  facilities.  At  this  time,  the  windows  were 
replaced  with  aluminum  frame  awning  windows  as  well  as 
some  aluminum  frame  glass  jalousies.  This  renovation 
required  the  infill  of  much  exterior  wall  area.  Picture 
windows  were  installed  in  the  restaurant  and  bar.  An  air 
conditioning  system  provided  cool  air  to  the  ballroom, 
bar,  and  restaurant.  A  70x41  ft  one-story  addition  was 
constructed  in  1968  with  an  open  ground  floor  and  flat  roof. 

The  ballroom  was  relocated  to  this  area,  which  became  an 
extension  of  the  restaurant.  The  air  conditioning  system 
was  upgraded  at  this  time  with  the  provision  of  a  separate 
chiller  building.  A  1978  addition  to  the  rear  of  the  main 
block,  measuring  39  x34  ft,  was  constructed  of  low  concrete 
block  walls,  screened  steel  bar  grilles  above  the  block, 
and  a  low  pitch  shed  roof.  By  1984  this  addition  had  become 
annexed  to  the  bar  area,  and  horizontal  sliding  windows 
had  replaced  the  grilles.  The  ballroom  addition  received  a 
low-pitch  Spanish  tile  roof  in  1993. 

Temporary  Officers  *  Quarters 

With  the  vast  amount  of  construction  underway  in  the  Canal  Zone  at  this  time,  most 
available  housing  was  occupied.  Having  staffed-up  to  accomplish  the  expansion 
project,  the  Quartermaster  Corps  found  itself  short  of  housing  for  its  own  workers. 
This  shortage  was  alleviated  at  Fort  Clayton  by  building  five  sets  of  temporary  offi¬ 
cers’  quarters  [4.12].  An  Assistant  Constructing  Quartermaster’s  Office  had  opened 
at  Fort  Clayton  about  this  time.  Funds  for  the  project  came  from  the  expansion  pro¬ 
gram,  and  the  Constructing  Quartermaster’s  Office,  PCD,  developed  the  plans  and 
hired  local  labor  to  execute  construction.  The  project  was  authorized  on  14  Septem¬ 
ber  1939  and  construction  began  on  9  October  1939.  Materials  were  procured  from 
The  Panama  Canal,  from  the  local  market,  and  imported  from  the  United  States.  The 
five  houses  were  completed  on  31  January  1940  at  a  cost  of  $4100  each.24 

Located  at  the  north  end  of  the  Officers’  Row  with  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  officers’ 
quarters,  these  temporary  quarters  were  similarly  sited  facing  onto  the  open  area 
toward  the  infantry  barracks.  The  quarters  shared  many  of  the  same  design  elements 
used  in  other  tropical  quarters  built  in  the  Canal  Zone.  The  primary  difference 


4-13 


[4.12]  Temporary  officers’  quarters,  Buildings 
88-92. 


between  these  temporary  quarters  and  their  permanent  neighbors  was  the  use  of 
wood  as  the  primary  building  material.  The  frame  buildings  measured  18  x  52  ft,  with 
a  24  x  27  ft  wing.  Corrugated  iron*  covered  the  roof  with  its  wide,  overhanging  eaves. 
The  concrete  area  under  the  raised  first  floor  contained  a  servant’s  room  with  bath,  a 
storeroom,  and  a  closet.  Stairways  led  up  to  the  front  porch  and  kitchen.  There  was  a 
large  combined  porch/living  room  at  the  front  of  the  house,  which  included  large 
screened  openings  installed  with  louvered  blinds.  The  dining  room  was  located  in 
one  half  of  the  area  behind  the  porch.  The  rooms  were  open  to  each  other  and  the 
large  screens  extended  around  this  side  of  the  building.  The  other  half  of  the  area 
behind  the  porch  was  an  enclosed  kitchen.  The  bedroom  wing  was  placed  on  the 
other  axis  and  contained  three  bedrooms,  a  hallway,  and  two  baths.  The  bedrooms, 
kitchen,  and  baths  had  wood  casement  windows. 

Far  from  being  temporary,  these  five  houses  remained 
occupied  until  closure  of  Fort  Clayton  in  1999.  For  Build¬ 
ings  88-92,  few  exterior  modifications  were  made  other  than 
for  ventilation  purposes.  The  front  of  the  porch  had  wood 
louvers  installed  below  the  screened  openings  by  1954.  The 
installation  of  central  air  conditioning  in  1987-1988  made 
it  necessary  to  replace  the  screened  openings  and  casement 
windows  with  double-hung  windows.  As  part  of  this  modifica¬ 
tion,  the  wood  louvers  were  removed  and  the  openings  filled 
in  with  siding.  All  quarters  were  completely  rewired  to 
accommodate  the  air  conditioning  upgrade.  In  1996 
Buildings  91  and  92  were  converted  for  use  as 


*  It  is  worth  noting  here  again  that  although  the  property  records  specifically  identify  the  roofing  material  as  “corrugated  iron,"  it 
is  more  likely  that  the  material  was  actually  steel,  which  is  distinct  from  iron  in  terms  of  metallurgy.  The  wording  of  the  original 
record  has  been  preserved  in  the  current  text,  however. 


4-14 


distinguished  visitor  quarters.  For  each 
building,  the  ground  floor  servant's  room 
was  expanded  and  remodeled  into  a  guest 
room.  On  the  main  floor,  the  central 
bedroom  of  each  building  was  converted  to 
a  living  area.  The  utilities  were 
upgraded.  The  grounds  were  much  improved 
with  the  addition  of  a  metal  canopy  that 
connected  the  two  buildings,  widened  side¬ 
walks,  curvilinear  decorative  concrete 
block  screening  walls,  and  extensive 
plantings . 

Expansion  Program  Administrative 
Construction-Mobile  Force 
Headquarters  Building 


As  the  Panama  Canal  Department  prepared  to  enter  the  war  the  need  for  a  new 
mobile  force  headquarters  building  became  apparent  The  Panama  Canal  Mobile 
Force  had  been  using  as  its  main  facility  a  wood  structure  located  on  Roosevelt 
Avenue  in  front  of  the  Panama  Railroad  line  in  Balboa.  Plans  were  made  for  the  con¬ 
struction  of  a  larger  headquarters  building,  more  securely  and  conveniently  located 
at  Fort  Clayton  [4.13]. 25 


[4.13]  Panama  Mobile  Force  Headquarters 
Building. 


The  new  Mobile  Force  Headquarters  (Building  164),  located  on  the  site  of  the  cur¬ 
rent  chapel  (Building  64),  faced  Gaillard  Highway.  Completed  and  ready  for  occu¬ 
pancy  on  28  February  1941,  the  administrative  building  measured  approximately  42 
x  90  ft  with  a  porte-cochere  on  the  south  end.  The  concrete  foundation  supported 
walls  of  wood  siding.  The  roof  was  of  galvanized  iron. 


The  ground  floor  plan  included  a  stationery  supply  room,  mimeograph  supply 
room,  mimeograph  room,  storage  room,  caretaker’s  room  with  dry  closet,  NCO’s 
room  with  dry  closet,  message  center  with  supply  closet,  drafting  room  with  alcove, 
officers’  toilet  with  dry  room  and  shower,  and  enlisted  men’s  toilet  with  shower. 
There  was  also  space  for  parking  seven  cars.  The  second  floor  contained  a  deck 
over  the  porte-cochere,  an  office  for  the  Mobile  Force  Commanding  General,  a  con¬ 
ference  room,  and  clerical  space.  The  construction  of  the  building  was  executed  by 
enlisted  soldier  labor  under  the  supervision  of  the  11th  Engineers. 


Expansion  Program  Operations  and  Support  Facilities 

Other  than  barracks  and  housing,  a  large  part  of  the  construction  at  Fort  Clayton 
during  this  prewar  era  was  related  to  the  support  of  troops  and  military  mission 
made  necessary  by  the  expansion  of  the  installation.  With  the  rapid  influx  of 
troops,  support  facilities  were  overtaxed  and  new  ones  were  required.  The  devel¬ 
opment  of  these  facilities  highlights  contemporary  military  trends  in  general,  and 
Army  trends  in  particular.  The  threat  of  becoming  involved  in  World  War  II  dic¬ 
tated  the  need  for  heightened  training,  security,  and  defenses.  These  needs,  in 


4-15 


turn,  drove  the  requirements  for  facilities  such  as  aircraft  warning  towers,  a  radio 
transmitting  station,  a  fire  house,  a  headquarters  building,  and  a  firing  range.  Per¬ 
haps  surprisingly,  the  inevitable  shift  from  animal  transportation  to  motor  vehi¬ 
cles  proceeded  more  quickly  among  the  public  at  large  than  within  Canal  Zone 
military  units,  primarily  due  to  terrain  difficulties.  The  shift  was  occurring,  how¬ 
ever,  as  indicated  by  the  construction  of  new  motor  pool  facilities  and  garages  at 
Fort  Clayton. 

Chiva  Chiva  Firing  Range 

Training  remained  an  essential  element  of  the  mission  of  the  troops  at  Fort  Clayton 
and  other  installations  in  the  Canal  Zone.  In  order  to  support  the  training  of  troops 
in  small  arms  fire,  the  original  target  range  northwest  of  Quarters  9  was  closed  and 
relocated  to  a  more  suitable  parcel  of  land.  The  new  site,  recommended  by  the 
Housing  Board  in  June  1939,  was  contiguous  with  a  small  area  of  Fort  Clayton’s 
northern  boundary. 26 

The  new  site,  located  in  an  area  known  as  Chiva  Chiva,  contained  almost  100  acres 
and  was  located  about  one  mile  north  of  the  installation.  The  Chiva  Chiva  Firing 
Range  was  “provided  to  serve  all  units  stationed  at  Fort  Clayton,  to  facilitate  the 
completion  of  small  arms  firing.”2'  Construction  of  the  range  was  assigned  to  the 
11th  Engineers  with  additional  troop  labor  supplied  by  enlisted  men  assigned  to  Fort 
Clayton.  Target  equipment  was  supplied  by  the  PCD  Ordnance  Officer;  the  PCD  Sig¬ 
nal  Officer  was  tasked  with  installing  communication  facilities;  and  the  Construct¬ 
ing  Quartermaster  provided  all  building  materials  and  heavy  equipment  required 
for  earthmoving.  Construction  began  on  12  February  1940  and  was  completed  on  11 
May  1940  at  a  total  cost  of  about  $27,500.28 

The  Chiva  Chiva  Firing  Range  consisted  of  three  shed-type  firing  point  shelters, 
each  measuring  20  x  99  ft,  with  corrugated  iron  roofs  but  no  walls  or  floors  [4.14, 
4.15].  Parallel  to  the  shelters  were  three  target  houses,  designated  Buildings 
169-171,  built  entirely  of  reinforced  concrete. 


Aircraft  Warning  Signal 

In  July  1940,  The  Panama  Canal  constructed  an  aircraft 
warning  signal  tower  on  Fort  Clayton.  Identified  as  Facility 
162,  the  tower  was  constructed  of  steel  on  a  concrete  base 
measuring  12  x  12  ft.  It  was  located  at  the  corner  of  Gail- 
lard  Highway  and  Craig  Avenue,  directly  across  the  street 
from  Quarters  800. 

Fire  Station  and  Guard  House  (Building  172) 

On  21  June  1941,  the  Novey  and  Lutrell  Construction  Com¬ 
pany  of  Ancon,  Canal  Zone,  completed  construction  of 
Building  172,  the  fire  station  and  guard  house  with  com- 
munition  center  [4.16],  Located  on  Morse  Avenue  (called  Toohey  Avenue  at  that  F™tviewofthe  Fire  Statio"  and  Guard 

time)  across  the  street  from  Building  130  (barracks),  this  building  was  designed  to 
replace  Buildings  40  and  41.  Located  in  the  original  33rd  Infantry  stable  area,  the 
original  wooden  guard  house  and  fire  station  were  considered  fire  hazards.29 

The  new  two-story  building  measured  170  x  36  ft,  with  a  rear  “LT  detention  wing 
measuring  127  x  31  ft.  It  was  designed  to  reflect  the  appearance  of  barracks  build¬ 
ings  on  the  adjacent  quadrangle,  and  was  finished  with  concrete  walls  and  a  clay 
tile  roof.  A  fire  siren  was  mounted  on  the  roof.  (Identical  structures  were  also  built 
at  Forts  Gulick  and  Kobbe.) 

The  building  was  divided  into  three  sections:  the  fire  station,  the  communication 
center,  and  the  detention  center.  The  first  floor  of  the  fire  station  section,  which 
accommodated  12  firemen,  included  an  apparatus  room  with  hose  rack,  work¬ 
space,  alarm  room,  firemen’s  dayroom,  office  for  the  fire  chief,  dry  closet,  and  gen¬ 
eral  room  [4.17,  4.18].  On  the  second  floor  were  located  a  dormitory  for  ten  men 


[4.17]  Fort  Clayton  firemen  practice  a  tower  and  hose  drill  for  Fire  Pre-  [4.18]  Presentation  of  individual  awards  for  Fire  Drill  Competition, 
vention  Week,  September  1948.  October  1954. 


4-17 


and  sleeping  quarters  for  two  NCOs.  The  communication  center  included  a  Signal 
Corps  office,  storage  room,  and  terminal  room  on  the  first  floor,  and  on  the  second, 
an  equipment  room,  operating  room,  and  toilets.  The  first  floor  of  the  detention  sec¬ 
tion  contained  a  dormitory  for  12  guards,  and  there  was  another  dormitory  for  10 
guards  on  the  second  floor.  Prisoners  were  kept  in  the  rear  wing  that  included  a  cell 
block  with  26  bunks,  a  separate  room  with  six  beds,  two  rooms  with  four  beds 
each,  and  a  one-bed  solitary  confinement  room.  The  facility  could  house  a  total  of 
41  prisoners. 

Building  172  changed  little  over  the  years,  with  most  of 
the  modifications  executed  on  the  interior  of  the  facility. 

In  1966  security  screens  in  the  parolee  area  were  replaced 
with  concrete  block,  and  in  1973  interior  wood  walls  were 
replaced  with  concrete.  Security  improvements  were  made  to 
the  confinement  section  in  1975  and  1994.  In  1980  and  1988 
the  Military  Police  area  was  renovated. 


Radio  Transmitting  Station  (Building 209) 

In  December  1941  a  permanent  radio  transmitting  station  (Building  209)  was  con¬ 
structed  at  Fort  Clayton  on  the  northwest  end  of  the  New  Post.  Before  this  time  a 
senior-grade  housing  unit  at  Albrook  Air  Force  Base  was  being  used  for  radio  trans¬ 
mission.  Built  at  a  cost  of  about  $64,500,  Building  209  was  laid  on  a  concrete  founda¬ 
tion  with  concrete  and  tile  floors,  concrete  walls,  and  clay  tile  roof.  The  main 
building  was  three  stories  high  and  measured  121  x  41  ft. 


During  its  early  years  and  throughout  World  War  II,  the  Armed  Forces  Radio  Station 
fell  under  the  direction  of  the  PCD  Special  Services  Branch.  Personnel  assigned  to 
the  Panama  Canal  Zone  were  thrilled  to  hear  baseball  games,  music,  and  news  from 
home.  There  were  other  radio  stations  in  Panama 
City  at  this  time,  but  programming  was  broadcast 
in  Spanish  and  Central  American  popular  music 
was  the  main  feature  of  local  broadcasts. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  Panamanian  radio  sta¬ 
tions  wanted  the  Army  to  discontinue  broadcasting. 

It  had  been  understood  that  local  stations  would 
regain  their  monopoly  following  the  war.  The  com¬ 
mand  did  not  concur,  however,  feeling  that  pro¬ 
gramming  targeted  to  U.S.  citizens  made  a  positive 
contribution  to  military  morale.  Consequently, 
broadcasting  from  this  facility  continued  until  the 
transfer  of  Fort  Clayton  in  1999  [4.19, 4.20]. 30 

Routine  modifications  and  rehabili¬ 
tations  were  made  to  Building  209 
throughout  the  years.  The  network 
name  also  changed,  from  Caribbean 


[4.19]  A  soldier  "working  on  her  own  show  at 
Armed  Forces  Radio.”  The  show,  called  "Doctors 
Orders,”  had  a  large  audience  in  May  1953. 


4-18 


Forces  to  Southern  Command  Network  [4.21],  The  former  name 
was  adopted  in  the  1950s  when  telecasting  was  introduced. 

The  latter  name  came  about  with  the  creation  of  the  U.S. 

Army  Southern  Command. 

11th  Engineer  Motor  Pool  Facility 

The  old  2nd  Field  Artillery  was  almost  entirely  motorized  by  1941  when  Building  135, 
the  engineer  motor  pool,  was  constructed  just  east  of  the  stables.  The  11th  Engi¬ 
neers  had  been  located  at  Corozal  but  they  outgrew  their  facilities,  and  it  was 


[4.20]  A  Southern  Command  Network  (SCN) 
radio  broadcast 


[4.21]  SCN  Dish. 


4-19 


decided  that  they  would  be  realigned  to  Fort  Clayton.  When  the  Engineers  moved 
into  their  new  barracks  at  Fort  Clayton,  permission  was  granted  on  1  April  1940  to 
construct  a  new  motor  pool  for  the  group.  The  Panama  Augmentation  Program,  Mil- 
itary  Appropriation  Act,  and  Aviation  Expansion  Program  covered  funding  for  the 
project,  which  totaled  about  $28,800.SI 

The  motor  pool,  built  to  accommodate  43  vehicles,  was  located  in  the  New  Post 
area.32  The  main  building  measured  approximately  358  x  296  ft  and  formed  a  hollow 
square.  The  foundation  was  concrete,  with  concrete  and  crushed  rock  floors,  walls 
of  wood  siding,  and  a  corrugated  iron  roof.  Construction  began  on  11  April  1940  and 
was  completed  on  11  January  1941. 

Field  Artillery  Garage 

The  2nd  Field  Artillery  was  becoming  increasingly  mechanized.  In  1940  troop  labor 
was  used  to  construct  Building  134.  Located  immediately  east  of  Building  111,  the 
Field  Artillery  Garage  measured  168  x  40  ft.  It  was  built  on  a  concrete  pier  foundation 
with  a  floor  of  dirt  and  crushed  rock.  The  walls  were  simple  wood  frame  construe* 
tion  supporting  a  galvanized  iron  roof.  The  floor  plan  included  16  motor  vehicle 
stalls,  a  mechanic’s  pit,  two  mechanical  repair  shops,  dispatcher’s  office,  issue 
room,  paint  shop,  salvage  room,  field  artillery  supply  office,  and  sub-guard  office. 

Expansion  Program  Community  Buildings 

The  rapid  buildup  of  forces  required  not  only  new  housing  and  military  support 
facilities,  but  also  new  facilities  to  support  everyday  life.  There  were  quite  suddenly 
many  more  people  at  Fort  Clayton  and  each  one  created  an  additional  requirement 
for  communication,  food,  fuel,  and  recreational  facilities.  Because  security  con¬ 
cerns  were  increasing  due  to  growing  military  aggression  in  Europe  and  the  Far 
East  there  was  a  new  push  to  make  military  installations  in  the  Canal  Zone  as  self- 
sufficient  as  possible.  As  a  result,  facilities  previously  available  off  post  were  often 
duplicated  on  base  or  moved  onto  an  installation. 

Post  Office 

Constructed  mostly  of  salvage  material,  a  new  post 
office  facility  (Building  151)  was  built  in  October  1939 
[4.22].  It  was  a  small  building,  measuring  30  x  44  ft 
and  elevated  on  wood  posts  mounted  in  concrete. 

The  floors  and  walls  were  wood,  and  the  roof  was 
corrugated  iron.  The  post  office  was  located  in  the 
recreation  area  of  Fort  Clayton,  northeast  of  the  gym¬ 
nasium  and  bowling  alley. 

Post  Exchange  Garage 

A  PX  garage  (Building  152)  was  constructed  in  1941 
on  Craig  Avenue,  just  south  of  the  engineer  motor 
pool.  Unlike  Building  135,  which  serviced  government 


[4.22]  Post  Office  (Building  151). 


4-20 


vehicles,  the  PX  garage  serviced  privately  owned  vehicles.  Constructed  with  PX 
funds,  the  single-story  U-shaped  service  station  building  measured  120  ft  in  length, 
with  two  front  projecting  wings  each  60  ft  long.  A  second,  smaller  two-story  building, 
measuring  30  x  24  ft,  housed  the  automobile  accessories  and  supplies  store  on  the 
first  floor,  with  a  one-bedroom  single-family  living  quarters  on  the  second  floor.  A 
5000-gallon  underground  gasoline  storage  tank  serviced  four  gasoline  pumps.  By 
1953  the  garage  was  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  45th  Reconnaissance  Battalion,  and 
at  the  time  of  transfer  it  was  operated  by  the  534th  Motor  Pool  [4.23] . 

Commissary 

The  commissary  (Building  175),  or  Quartermaster  Storehouse,  Office  and  Sales,  as 
it  was  called,  was  constructed  to  replace  Building  37,  the  old  quartermaster  office 
and  warehouse  which  by  1941  had  inadequate  storage  room  and  had  come  to  be 
considered  a  fire  hazard.  Notice  to  proceed  with  the  project  was  sent  to  the  contrac¬ 
tor,  Novey  and  Luttrell  Company,  on  12  June  1940.  Located  in  the  quartermaster  area 
between  Winthrop  and  Pullen  Streets,  and  facing  Coiner  Street,  the  commissary  was 
completed  on  30  October  1941. 33 

Until  the  construction  of  this  commissary  and  others  exactly  like  it  at  Fort  Gulick 
(Building  304)  and  Fort  Kobbe/Howard  Air  Force  Base  (Building  1),  Canal  Zone 
military  personnel  and  their  families  did  their  grocery  shopping  at  commissaries 
owned  and  managed  by  The  Panama  Canal.  In  the  early  years  the  Commissary 
Department  of  the  Isthmian  Canal  Commission  built  and  operated  its  own  ice 
cream  plant,  bakery,  coffee-roasting  facility  and  banana  plantation,  and  also  ran 
hog,  chicken,  and  dairy  farms  in  Corozal 34  It  had  been  determined  that  the  Panama 
Canal  Zone  would  be  entirely  self-sufficient,  not  having  to  rely  on  its  host  nation  for 
either  food  or  clothing  supplies.  However,  the  Army  did  not  particularly  like 
depending  on  The  Panama  Canal,  afid  as  a  result  it  began  constructing  its  own  gas 
stations,  commissaries,  and  hospitals  on  the  various  posts  throughout  the  isthmus. 


[4.23]  Vehicle  maintenance  shop  (Building 
152). 


4-21 


The  commissary  and  storage  building  was  rectangular  in  shape,  184  x  62  ft  on  the 
first  floor  with  a  partial  second  floor  measuring  62  x  62  ft  over  the  front  part  of  the 
building.  Constructed  completely  of  concrete,  the  building  was  roofed  with 
asbestos-protected  metal.  While  clay  tile  was  the  preferred  roofing  material  because 
of  its  durability,  it  was  also  the  most  expensive  roofing  material  of  the  available  alter¬ 
natives.  For  warehouses  and  temporary  buildings,  then,  asbestos-coated  corru¬ 
gated  steel  was  used  for  roofing  to  reduce  first  costs  and  minimize  subsequent 
maintenance  costs. 

The  first  floor  of  Building  175  contained  a  lobby  entered  through  a  set  of  double 
doors.  A  women’s  restroom,  a  small  office,  a  basket  space,  two  “basket  slides,”  and 
one  cashier  occupied  the  front  section.  The  middle  and  rear  sections  accommo¬ 
dated  the  groceries  section,  meats  section,  and  various  refrigerated  cases  and  dis¬ 
plays.  A  passage  led  to  the  receiving  and  ordering  station;  the  rear  of  the  building 
comprised  a  large  storage  area  with  loading  platforms  on  either  side  of  the  building. 
The  second  floor  housed  men’s  and  women’s  restrooms,  a  small  closet,  and  a  large 
office. 

Supplies  were  transported  to  this  and  other  buildings  at  Fort  Clayton  by  rail  along 
the  newly  completed  Panama  Railroad  spur  [4.24].  The  railroad  line  was  part  of  the 
general  construction  plan  being  executed  throughout  Canal  Zone  military  bases; 
this  new  rail  spur  split  from  the  main  line  in  front  of  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  stables, 
curved  in  a  northeastern  direction,  and  ran  to  the  engineer  storage  area  parallel  to 
Buildings  177  and  175.  This  section  of  track  opened  on  14  December  1940.35 

In  1955  Building  175  was  modified  to  serve  as  a  training 
center.  The  front  section  of  the  first  floor  was  partitioned 
to  accommodate  seven  offices,  and  the  second  floor  was 
remodeled  to  house  a  classroom,  recreation  room,  office, 
and  training  aids  room.  In  1964,  after  further  modifica¬ 
tions  and  air  conditioning  of  the  building,  the  first  floor 
contained  three  offices,  a  conference  room,  and  an  air  con¬ 
ditioning  equipment  room;  the  second  floor  contained  an 


[4.24]  Fort  Clayton  railroad  spur  track  under 
construction. 


4-22 


exhibition  area,  a  large  conference  room,  storage  room, 
and  two  offices.  The  building  continued  to  serve  as  a  train¬ 
ing  aids  center  until  1999. 

Bus  Stop  Shelters 

The  PCD  PX  funded  several  community  service  projects  completed  in  1939,  includ¬ 
ing  the  construction  of  several  bus  stop  shelters  such  as  Facility  148  (located 
between  Buildings  129  and  130)  and  Facility  150  (across  Gaillard  Highway  from 
Quarters  814  and  815).  Because  the  young  military  dependents  on  post  were  bused 
to  various  Canal  Zone  schools,  bus  stop  shelters  were  a  necessity,  especially  dur¬ 
ing  rainy  season  deluges.  Troops  were  also  transported  on  buses,  which  ran  from 
Fort  Clayton  through  Balboa  into  Panama  City  [4.25].  Facility  149,  located  at  the 
intersection  of  Craig  and  Hawkins  Avenues,  was  still  in  use  up  to  the  time  of  the 
transfer  in  1999. 

Athletic  Courts 

Athletic  facilities  constructed  during  this  era  were  limited  to  tennis  and  volleyball 
courts.  Facility  165,  a  single  tennis  court,  was  completed  in  December  1937.  Located 
on  Gaillard  Highway  near  the  Field  Artillery  Barracks,  the  court  was  constructed  by 
the  11th  Engineers  with  soldier  labor.  Three  single  tennis  courts  (Facilities  158,  159, 
and  160)  were  constructed  using  soldier  labor  behind  Quarters  2  with  Athletic  and 
Recreation  funds  in  February  1940.  A  double  court,  Facility  174,  was  constructed  in 
June  1941.  Located  between  the  engineer  barracks  at  Soldier’s  Field  and  the  field 
artillery  stables,  the  courts  measured  120  x  100  ft.  Facility  161,  a  nine-court  volleyball 
court,  was  completed  in  July  1940.  Constructed  under  the  direction  of  the  11th  Engi¬ 
neers  with  soldier  labor,  the  courts  measured  270  x  60  ft. 


[4.25]  View  from  Headquarters  Building  show¬ 
ing  bus  shelters,  1938. 


Theater  #2 


Because  of  the  increase  in  the  number  of  personnel  assigned  to  Fort  Clayton,  the 
command  found  it  necessary  to  construct  a  second  theater.  Located  in  the  recre¬ 
ation  area  on  Caples  Street,  Theater  # 2  (Build¬ 
ing  71)  was  an  exact  replica  of  Building  49 
[4.26, 4.27].  Construction  was  completed  on  30 
June  1940.  A  survey  from  this  era  indicated  that 
the  soldiers’  favorite  pastime  on  post  was  to 
view  movies  at  the  base  theater.  (Their  second 
favorite  on-post  activity  was  visiting  the  service 
club  or  beer  hall.)36 

Theater  #2  was  demolished  on  30 
September  1969  to  make  way  for 
Valent  Recreation  Center  (Build¬ 
ing  53)  . 


[4.26]  Members  of  the  11th  Engineers  and  their 
Army  Day  Display  at  Fort  Clayton.  Note  (left  to 
right  in  background)  beer  garden,  Theater  #2 
under  construction,  gymnasium,  and  Theater  #1. 


Gustav  Schay,  the  originator  of  the  Bellavistino 
Style,  was  the  architect  responsible  for  the 


4-23 


design  of  both  theaters  at  Fort  Clayton.  It  should  be  noted  that  he  did  not  fare  well 
during  World  War  II 37 

Ready  or  Not . . . 

The  U.S.  perspective  on  the  conflicts  in  Europe  and  the  Far  East  changed  drastically 
on  the  morning  of  7  December  1941.  Although  Herculean  efforts  to  upgrade  the 
defenses  of  the  Panama  Canal  were  in  progress,  it  would  be  two  more  years  before 
they  were  entirely  completed.  Strategic  plans  for  dealing  with  future  attacks  had 
been  formulated  and  the  Panama  Canal  Department  had  made  great  strides  toward 
implementing  these  plans.  In  spite  of  contractual  problems,  supply  problems,  ship¬ 
ping  delays,  and  a  severe  shortage  of  labor,  the  1939  construction  program  was  only 
slightly  behind  its  projected  completion  date  of  1  November  1941.  Nearly  all  con¬ 
tracts  had  been  let,  and  most  projects  were  underway.  Meanwhile,  troops  were 
pouring  into  the  Canal  Zone  in  preparation  for  whatever  might  come.  Fort  Clayton 
was  poised  to  be  a  vital  element  in  wartime  activities. 


Notes  for  Chapter  4 

1  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD, 
Vol.  2,  Preparation  for  War  1939-194}  (1949), 
150. 

2  Ibid. 

3  Ibid.,  127-128. 

4  Stetson  Conn,  Rose  C.  Engelman,  and  Byron 
Fairchild,  The  Western  Hemisphere :  Guarding 


the  United  States  and  Its  Outposts ,  Vol.  12  of 
United  States  Army  in  World  War  II,  ed.  Stet¬ 
son  Conn  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1964),  302. 

5  Ibid.,  302-303. 

6  Susan  Harp,  “Panama  Canal  Defense  Vital 
During  Second  World  War,”  Panama  Canal 
Spillway ,  2  July  1993. 

7  Ibid.,  327-335;  Historical  Section,  Caribbean 
Defense  Command,  The  Caribbean  Defense 


Command  in  the  Defense  of  the  Americas, 
Vol.  1  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Caribbean 
Defense  Command,  circa  1949),  USARSO 
History  Office  files,  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD, 
265. 

8  Harp,  “Panama  Canal  Defense  Vital,”  2  July 
1993;  Conn,  Engelman,  and  Fairchild,  Guard¬ 
ing  the  United  States  and  Its  Outposts,  304, 
310-316. 


9  AG  Historical  Branch,  Military  Personnel, 
44-45. 

10  Ibid.,  39-40. 

11  Historical  Section,  The  Caribbean  Defense 
Command,  Vol.  1, 107-108. 

12  AG  Historical  Branch,  Military  Personnel, 
139-140. 

13  Ibid.,  76. 

14  Arthur  R.  Datnoff;  letter  to  Julie  L.  Webster 
dated  19  December  1999. 

15  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD, 
Vol.  3,  The  War  Period  1941-1945,  210-212. 

16  AG  Historical  Branch,  Military  Personnel, 
136-137. 

17  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD, 
Vol.  1,  49;  Vol.  2,  34;  “The  Army  and  Navy,” 

95. 

18  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD, 
Vol.  1,49;  Vol.  2,  34. 

19  “Completion  Report  Covering  the  Construc¬ 
tion  of  Two  (2)  Barracks  for  the  11th 
Engineers  at  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone  under 
Contract  No.  W-61-qm-124  with  Novey  & 
Lutrell,  P.O.  Box  2007,  Ancon,  C.Z.,  23  July 
1937”  1,  9-10,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the 
Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943,  Box  67,  Claremont  Termi¬ 
nal  to  Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

20  “Completion  Report  of  Five  Barracks  Build¬ 
ings  and  Appurtenant  Utilities  at  Fort 
Clayton,  Canal  Zone,  20  May  1940,”  1,  4,  23, 
26,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of 
Engineers,  Construction  Completion  Reports 
1917-1943,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

21  Ibid.,  1. 


22  Panama  Canal  Department,  “Construction,” 
Vol.  II  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ;  Panama  Canal 
Department,  1945),  USARSO  History  Office 
files,  National  Archives  and  Records  Admin¬ 
istration,  College  Park,  MD,  483. 

23  Ibid. 

24  “Completion  Report  for  the  Construction  and 
Completion  of  Temporary  Officers  Quarters 
at  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone,  17  June  1940,” 
1-8,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of 
Engineers,  Construction  Completion  Reports 
1917-1943,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 

College  Park,  MD. 

25  “Completion  Report  No.  6  Covering 
Construction  and  Completion  of  Mobile 
Force  Headquarters  Building  at  Fort  Clayton, 
Canal  Zone"  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Office  of 
the  Constructing  Quartermaster,  Panama 
Canal  Department,  15  June  1941),  74,  Record 
Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers, 
Construction  Completion  Reports  1917-1943, 
Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  National  Archives 
and  Records  Administration,  College  Park, 
MD. 

26  “Completion  Report  on  the  Construction  and 
Completion  of  a  Target  Range  at  Chiva  Chiva, 
Corundu  Military  Reservation,  Canal  Zone” 
(Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Office  of  the  Construct¬ 
ing  Quartermaster,  Panama  Canal 
Department,  16  October  1940),  55-56, 

Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engi¬ 
neers,  Construction  Completion  Reports 
1917-1943,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (3),  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

27  Ibid.,  54. 

28  Ibid.,  55-56,  58. 

29  “Completion  Report  on  the  Construction  and 
Completion  of  Fire  and  Guard  House,  Quar¬ 
termaster  Storehouse  and  Office,  and 
Artillery  Engineer’s  Warehouse  at  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton,  Canal  Zone”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Office 
of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Caribbean  Defense 
Command,  14  July  1942),  7,  Record  Group  77, 


Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction 
Completion  Reports  1917-1943,  Box  68,  Fort 
Clayton  (3),  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

30  AG  Historical  Branch,  Military  Personnel, 
183-185. 

31  “Completion  Report  No.  7  on  the  Construc¬ 
tion  and  Completion  of  11th  Engineers  Motor 
Pool  at  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone”  (Quarry 
Heights,  CZ:  Office  of  the  Constructing  Quar¬ 
termaster,  Panama  Canal  Department, 

13  August  1941),  1,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the 
Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2), 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD. 

32  Ibid. 

33  “Completion  Report  on  the  Fire  and  Guard 
House,”  8-9, 11. 

34  Ulrich  Keller,  The  Building  of  the  Panama 
Canal  in  Historic  Photographs  (New  York: 
Dover  Publications,  Inc.,  1983),  64;  The 
Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  for  1917,  161. 

35  “Completion  Report  No.  5  on  the  Construc¬ 
tion  and  Completion  of  Railroad  Spur  Track 
at  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone”  (Quarry 
Heights,  CZ:  Corps  of  the  Constructing  Quar¬ 
termaster,  Panama  Canal  Department,  12  July 
1941,  82,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief 
of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2), 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD. 

36  AG  Historical  Branch,  Military  Personnel,  193. 

37  Richard  Holzer,  interview  by  author,  Panama 
City,  Panama,  11  November  1999;  electronic 
communication  from  Richard  Holzer  to 
author,  22  November  1999.  Schay,  a  citizen  of 
the  Republic  of  Panama,  was  married  to  a 
German  woman.  Once  the  United  States  and 
the  Republic  of  Panama  declared  war  on 
Germany,  Schay  was  deported  to  La  Cabana, 
a  Panamanian  camp  for  “enemy  aliens.” 


4-25 


CHAPTERS 


Transit  Through  the  Second  World  War  (1941-1945) 

Fort  Clayton’s  Role  in  World  War  II 

Infantry  Involvement  in  the  War 

In  the  Canal  Zone  as  in  the  United  States,  the  events  of  7  December  1941  brought 
immediate  and  lasting  changes.  The  Air  Corps  took  flight  in  search  of  the  enemy  as 
ground  troops  reported  in  at  their  posts.  Radio  and  cable  censorship  began,  and 
military  police  manned  border  points  between  the  Canal  Zone  and  the  Republic  of 
Panama.  In  Colon  and  Panama  City,  detainment  of  Japanese  persons  began.  By  11 
p.m.  on  7  December  nearly  half  of  the  estimated  300  Japanese  in  Panama  were 
being  held.  A  temporary  internment  camp  in  Balboa  was  rushed  into  existence.  At 
6:45  p.m.,  all  power  in  the  Canal  Zone  was  cut  off.  Nightly  blackouts  would  last  until 
15  April  1943.' 

After  the  attack  on  Pearl  Harbor  the  number  of  troops  in  Panama  was  sharply 
increased.  The  33rd  Infantry  was  transferred  from  Fort  Clayton  to  Trinidad,  leaving  a 
number  of  units  stationed  or  headquartered  at  Fort  Clayton.  These  included  the 
296th  Infantry  Regiment  and  elements  of  the  5th,  65th,  150th,  158th,  and  295th  Infantry 
Regiments;  the  1st,  2nd,  87th,  and  207th  Field  Artillery;  the  11th  Engineer  Regiment;  the 
73rd,  76th,  83rd,  and  615th  Anti-aircraft  Artillery  Group  and  the  615th  Coast  Artillery 
Regiment;  the  346th  and  347th  Anti-aircraft  Searchlight  Battalions;  the  765th  and  767th 
Anti-aircraft  Gun  Battalions,  and  the  906th  Anti-aircraft  Automatic  Weapons  Battal¬ 
ion.  The  150th  Infantry,  which  had  replaced  the  33rd  Infantry,  was  in  addition  to  its 
regular  duties  responsible  for  guarding  enemy  nationals  in  the  Balboa  Japanese 
Internment  Camp.  German  and  Italian  nationals  were  also  isolated  and  detained 
[5.01], 3 

The  newly  established  Caribbean  Defense  Command,  a  theater-wide  command  that 
included  the  Panama  Canal  Department,  continued  to  carry  out  its  mission  of  canal 
defense  by  casting  a  wide  net  of  naval  and  air  reconnaissance.  Army  Air  Corps  and 
Navy  planes  conducted  observation  flights,  and  armed  guards  accompanied  all 
ships  transiting  the  canal.  During  the  war  more  than  5300  combat  vessels  and  about 
8500  support  craft  passed  through  the  Panama  Canal.  As  expected  the  waterway 
provided  a  vital  link  between  the  oceans  to  facilitate  the  secure  movement  of  war¬ 
ships,  troop  transports,  and  supplies  wherever  they  were  needed. 

The  greatest  military  threat  to  the  canal  during  the  war  came  from  German  U-boats. 

During  1942  Nazi  submarines  took  a  heavy  toll  on  shipping  in  the  area  and  were 
considered  a  menace  to  the  Allied  war  effort.  U-boats  initially  succeeded  in  disrupt¬ 
ing  oil  supplies  by  sinking  tankers,  and  deprived  the  Allies  of  valuable  war  materiel 
by  attacking  other  cargo  ships.  Anti-submarine  defense  of  the  canal  was  stepped  up 
by  mining  harbor  entrances  and  installing  submarine  nets  at  the  canal  entrances.  At 
the  peak  of  the  U-boat  attacks,  in  June  1942,  14  U-boats  had  infiltrated  the  extended 


"That  night  a  blackout  was 
put  into  effect  by  pulling  the 
master  switches  . . .  Every 
room  in  the  Canal  Zone 
probably,  was  an  outside 
room  for  ventilation 
purposes.  Not  only  lights 
but  also  the  heat  unit  in  the 
dry  closets,  for  combating 
mildew  and  ever-present 
dampness  went  out.  The 
next  day  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Canal  Zone  moved 
about  in  damp,  sticky 
clothing.”2 


[5.01]  Japanese  internees  prepare  to  board  a 
train  to  the  Balboa  Concentration  Camp. 


5-1 


£3 


[5.02]  “Bushmasters”  crossing  a  jungle  stream  in  back  of  Fort  Clayton,  June  1942. 


defense  area  of  the  Caribbean  Sea  Frontier.  By  the  end  of  1942,  270  ships  had  been 
lost.  By  early  1943,  however,  the  tide  began  to  turn  thanks  to  intensified  air  defense 
and  the  deployment  of  military  convoys  to  escort  supply  ships.  An  additional  factor 
in  the  subsiding  attacks  was  Germany’s  transfer  of  submarines  to  other  waters  in 
order  to  disrupt  Allied  supply  lines  to  the  newly  active  theater  of  war  in  Africa.4 

The  Wartime  Canal  Defense  Mission 

Fort  Clayton’s  primary  mission  of  protecting  the  locks  became  more  important  than 
ever  with  the  advent  of  war.  The  mission  of  the  Panama  Mobile  Force— close-in  land 
defense— became  the  top  priority  on  the  logical  assumption  that  an  air  raid  on  the 
Panama  Canal  could  be  next  on  Japan’s  list  of  objectives.  As  headquarters  for  the 
Panama  Mobile  Force  and  Security  Command,  Fort  Clayton  had  a  key  role  in 
defending  the  locks  and  the  canal.  The  defense  was  provided  through  lock  guards, 
utility  guards,  barrage  balloons,  smoke  screens,  and  field  artillery.  Training  contin¬ 
ued  to  be  a  priority  for  troops  stationed  in  the  Canal  Zone  and  outlying  bases  [5.02, 
5.03].  Field  exercises  included  “beach  defense,  preparation  and  occupation  of 
defensive  positions,  delaying  action,  rapid  movement  by  motors,  and  defense  of  air¬ 
fields  against  parachute  and  ground  attack.”5 

In  some  ways  there  was  little  difference  between  the  prewar  period  and  the  war 
itself  for  U.S.  military  leaders  in  the  Canal  Zone.  During  the  war  as  before  it,  sabo¬ 
tage  was  considered  the  most  likely  mode  of  enemy  attack.  To  counteract  the  sab¬ 
otage  threat  as  early  as  1934,  the  Panama  Canal  Department  created  the  Lock 
Guards  and  the  Department  of  the  Navy  furnished  Transit  Guards  [5.04] .  The  Tran¬ 
sit  Guards  boarded  all  ships  and  accompanied  them  through  the  canal,  working  in 
both  directions.6  Authority  over  the  guards  was  an  issue  disputed  between  the 
canal’s  civilian  administrators  and  the  military.  The  authority  issue  was  ultimately 
resolved  on  5  September  1939  when  jurisdiction  over  the  canal  and  the  entire 


[5.03]  Nurses  learning  to  put  their  masks  on 
properly  during  a  gas  mask  drill,  March  1942. 


[5.04]  “Halt!  Who  goes  there?” 


5-2 


Canal  Zone  was  transferred  to  the  Commanding  General  of  the  Panama  Canal 
Department. 

Fort  Clayton  conducted  schools  for  malaria  prevention,  jungle  warfare  training,  and 
field  training  for  Latin  American  officers  and  troops.  The  jungle  warfare  training 
established  at  Fort  Clayton  would  later  move  to  Fort  Sherman  and  become  the  U.S. 
Army’s  premier  jungle  training  school  during  the  Vietnam  War.  The  Jungle  Opera¬ 
tions  Training  School  would  remain  in  operation  until  mid- 1999.  The  Latin  American 
school  would  eventually  become  the  U.S.  Army  School  of  the  Americas  at  Fort 
Gulick,  Republic  of  Panama.  (This  mission  was  transferred  to  Fort  Benning,  Geor¬ 
gia,  on  1  October  1984.)7 

Guarding  the  Miraflores  and  Pedro  Miguel  Locks 

The  primary  means  of  protecting  the  locks  from  an  enemy  aerial  attack  was  through 
the  use  of  barrage  balloons  and  smoke  screening  [5.05] .  The  Panama  Barrage  Bal¬ 
loon  forces,  which  consisted  of  the  301st  Battalion  stationed  at  Fort  Clayton  on  the 
Pacific  side  of  the  isthmus  and  Fort  Sherman  on  the  Atlantic  side,  flew  their  first  bar¬ 
rage  balloons  on  4  January  1942.  A  few  problems  evidently  developed  because  in 
March  instructions  were  issued  to  civilian  and  military  personnel  on  how  to  retrieve 
runaway  balloons.8 

The  first  smoke  screen  defense  was  tested  at  the  Pedro  Miguel  Locks  by  the  Chemi¬ 
cal  Warfare  Service  on  23  February  1942.  The  test  revealed  that  adequate  screening 
could  be  deployed  within  30  minutes.  The  initial  plan  called  for  smoke  screening  at 
Madden  Dam,  Miraflores  Locks,  Gatun  Locks,  Albrook  Field,  the  Mount  Hope  and 
La  Boca  Tank  Farms,  the  docks  at  Cristobal  and  Balboa,  and  Summit  Radio  Station. 
This  plan  was  drastically  scaled  back,  however,  and  screening  capabilities  were 
only  provided  for  the  locks  and  dam.  Then,  in  late  1943,  the  smoke  screen  and  bar¬ 
rage  balloon  projects  were  abandoned  due  to  a  reduction  in  force  that  resulted  in 
the  relocation  of  the  personnel  assigned  to  these  units. 

A  third  defensive  measure  was  known  as  the  “Killer  Net.”  Strung  across  Gaillard  Cut 
from  the  high  hills  on  either  side,  the  net  was  visible  from  Fort  Clayton.  Vertical 


“Fort  Clayton,  because  of  its 
location  very  near  both 
Pacific  end  locks  on  the 
canal,  was  an  ideal  location 
for  an  air  defense  unit  con¬ 
sisting  of  barrage  balloons. 
They  were  located  in  open 
spaces  at  and  around  Fort 
Clayton,  including  several 
on  the  golf  course  in  front  of 
my  quarters.  They  were  teth¬ 
ered  by  a  slender  (1/4  inch) 
steel  cable  and  run  up  sev¬ 
eral  thousand  feet.  They 
were  filled  with  hydrogen. 
Several  of  them  were  struck 
by  lightning  during  night¬ 
time  thunderstorms  and 
made  quite  a  fireworks  dis¬ 
play.  It  also  rained  a  couple 
of  thousand  feet  of  steel 
cable  for  a  few  minutes.” 

Robert  H.  Tippett,  11th 
Engineer  Regiment9 


[5.05]  A  D-6  low-altitude  dilatable-type  balloon 
at  the  Miraflores  Locks. 


5-3 


cables  were  suspended  from  a  strong  horizontal  cable  stretched  between  the  hills. 
The  net  served  to  prevent  low  bombing  runs  that  might  cause  a  landslide  and  block 
the  canal.10 

With  most  of  the  emergency  prewar  expansion  program  completed  by  1942,  little 
new  construction  was  necessary  in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone  during  the  war  years. 
One  exception  during  this  era,  however,  was  outposts— mainly  airfields— established 
by  the  unified  command  in  regions  of  the  Republic  of  Panama  and  several  Central 
and  South  American  countries.  Although  most  of  the  planning  for  these  outlying 
positions  had  been  completed  before  the  attack  on  Pearl  Harbor,  little  of  the  con¬ 
struction  had  been  executed.  The  facilities  needed  included  9  air  bases  and  air¬ 
dromes,  10  posts  for  ground  forces,  30  aircraft  warning  stations,  and  634 
searchlights,  anti-aircraft  gun  positions,  and  miscellaneous  tactical  and  logistical 
installations.11  The  11th  Engineer  Regiment  was  closely  involved  in  these  projects, 
particularly  with  the  construction  of  fighter  strips  on  Panama’s  Pacific  coast.  The 
11th  Engineer  Headquarters  at  Fort  Clayton  planned  and  directed  the  construction 
of  the  Rio  Hato  airfield.  Rio  Hato  became  a  very  critical  element  of  canal  defenses 
because  it  was  the  only  airfield  outside  the  Canal  Zone  that  could  handle  the  larger 
aircraft  used  during  the  period,  including  B-17s,  B-24s,  and  C-54s.  Fighter  bases 
were  also  constructed  by  the  11th  Engineers  at  Chame,  Chorrera,  Chepo,  and  Jaque 
in  the  Republic  of  Panama  [5.06]. 12 

One  activity  that  became  a  major  undertaking  during  the  war  years  was  road  con¬ 
struction.  The  first  7-mile  stretch  of  the  Boyd-Roosevelt  Highway  (the  Trans-Isthmian 
Highway)  was  opened  in  January  1942.  Until  its  completion  in  December  1944,  how¬ 
ever,  the  only  traffic  allowed  on  the  highway  was  that  “authorized  by  the  Panama 
Canal  Department  as  essential  to  the  war  activity,  even  military  vehicles  being 
banned  unless  they  had  special  authorization.”13  Also,  as  part  of  the  wartime 
defense  effort,  by  1942  Gaillard  Highway  had  been  rerouted  between  Fort  Clayton 


“I  was  driving  the  lead  truck 
in  the  Pacific  Motor  Pool 
when  it  completely  crossed 
the  Isthmus  of  Panama 
from  the  Pacific  Ocean  to 
the  Atlantic  Ocean  for  the 
very  first  time  by  motor  vehi¬ 
cle.  We  cleared  the 
vegetation  from  the  land  to 
make  a  road  -  The  Trans- 
Isthmian  Highway  -  50  feet 
wide  and  approximately  42 
miles  long.  It  took  us  28 
days  to  complete  our 
journey.  While  we  were 
clearing  the  vegetation,  civil¬ 
ians  surveyed  the  road  as 
we  went  across  the 
Isthmus.” 

Robert  L.  Overkott14 


[5.06]  A  dummy  plane  stands  beneath  a  shelter 
at  Camp  Chorrera,  Panama,  28  August  1942. 


5-4 


and  the  Panama  Canal  Railroad  tracks,  which  eliminated  the  heavy  on-post  traffic 
previously  associated  with  this  busy  road. 

Although  the  Caribbean  Defense  Command  was  never  an  active  theater  of  combat, 
the  threat  was  taken  very  seriously  and  affected  the  civilian  population.  The  black¬ 
outs  were  partial  until  11  p.m.,  then  total  for  the  rest  of  the  night.  Automobile  head¬ 
lights  were  coated  with  dull  red  paint.  All  mail  coming  into  and  leaving  the  Canal 
Zone  was  censored,  with  millions  of  letters  being  examined  before  this  policy 
ended  in  March  1945.  Severe  restrictions  were  placed  on  photography  for  the  dura¬ 
tion.  Canal  Zone  civilian  defense  personnel  received  training  in  aircraft  recognition 
and  the  use  of  gas  masks  by  early  1942.15 

Midwar  Reduction  in  Force 

By  January  1943  it  had  been  determined  that  there  was  little  likelihood  of  an  enemy 
attack  on  the  Panama  Canal.  The  U-boat  threat  was  receding,  and  Japan’s  military 
forces  were  busy  far  across  the  Pacific  Ocean.  The  defense  buildup  had  reached  its 
peak  at  this  point,  with  67,000  air  and  ground  force  troops  on  duty  with  the  Panama 
Canal  Department.  Construction  projects  were  all  but  finished,  and  a  number  of 
units  were  redeployed  to  more  critical  locations,  including  the  158th  Infantry  (Bush- 
masters)  with  the  59th  Engineer  (C)  Company  attached,  and  the  5th  Infantry.  The 
blackout  was  partially  lifted  on  15  April  1943;  streetlights  could  stay  on  until  11  p.m. 
and  interior  lights  could  remain  on  all  night  as  long  as  no  beam  of  light  was  cast  out¬ 
doors.  The  14th  Infantry  left  Panama  in  June  and  the  11th  Engineer  Regiment 
returned  to  the  United  States  in  August  1943,  accompanied  by  members  of  the  2nd 
Field  Artillery.  By  February  1944,  38,751  officers  and  enlisted  men  had  been  rede¬ 
ployed.  Outpost  installations  were  abandoned,  and  ordnance  and  materiel  were 
warehoused  until  they  could  be  shipped  elsewhere.  In  September  1944  the 
Caribbean  Defense  Command  reverted  to  a  prewar  alert  status  and  by  the  early 
months  of  1945,  Panama  Canal  Department  component  forces  were  submitting 
organization  and  operation  plans  for  a  postwar  scenario.  Throughout  1945  defen¬ 
sive  outposts  were  inactivated  and  abandoned.  On  2  September  1945  Japan  for¬ 
mally  surrendered  to  the  Allies  on  the  Battleship  Missouri  in  Tokyo  Bay.  By  the  end 
of  1945  many  of  the  defensive  emplacements  had  been  eliminated  or  removed,  and 
the  Panama  Canal  Department  had  set  a  new  strength  ceiling  of  20,000.16 

Wartime  Construction  at  Fort  Clayton 

Extending  Installation  Boundaries 

The  need  to  expand  Fort  Clayton  to  accommodate  the  wartime  troop  buildup 
resulted  in  significant  changes  to  the  configuration  of  the  post.  By  this  point  in  Fort 
Clayton’s  development,  nearly  all  the  original  fill  area  had  been  developed  [5.07] . 
New  construction  took  place  on  and  around  a  high  hill  across  the  Cardenas  River 
from  all  other  post  buildings,  and  this  left  an  empty  area  that  would  become  the  log¬ 
ical  site  for  future  expansion.  The  hills  forming  the  river  valley’s  edges  and  beyond 
would  receive  nearly  all  the  new  construction  for  the  remainder  of  Fort  Clayton’s 
existence,  but  during  the  World  War  II  period  this  elongation  to  the  east-northeast 
was  the  site  of  only  a  small  amount  of  new  construction. 


5-5 


Residential  Construction— Officers’  Quarters  With  New  Design  Elements 

Permanent  officer  housing  constructed  at  Fort  Clayton  as  part  of  the  prewar  expan¬ 
sion  project  was  not  finished  when  the  United  States  entered  the  war  in  December 
1941;  the  first  group  was  completed  in  early  1942.  The  plans  drawn  up  for  the  World 
War  II  expansion  period  quarters  differed  from  earlier  designs.  The  first  military  con¬ 
struction  on  Fort  Clayton  consisted  of  buildings  with  extensive  screened  porches  for 
ventilation.  Interior  rooms  were  small  and  had  few  window  openings.  In  facilities  of 
this  design  the  porches  became  the  de  facto  living  quarters  and  much  of  the  interior 
was  not  fully  utilized.  Porches  were  eliminated  in  the  designs  for  new  quarters.  Rooms 
were  expanded  and  provided  with  significantly  more  window  area  [5.08,  5.09].  This 
layout  provided  full  ventilation  and  much  better  lighting  for  almost  every  room.17 

Officers’  quarters  were  constructed  for  field  officers,  company  officers,  and  noncom¬ 
missioned  officers.  All  were  constructed  on  raised  concrete  piles  with  parking  space 
and  maid’s  quarters  on  the  ground  floor.  All  were  of  concrete  frame  construction 
with  stucco-covered  concrete  block  walls.  The  quarters  had  wide,  overhanging  roofs 
clad  with  red  Spanish  tile.  Continuous  mediaguas  sheltered  subsidiary  floors. 
Although  both  single  and  duplex  quarters  were  constructed,  all  were  quite  similar  in 
exterior  appearance.  All  duplex  quarters  were  shared  side-by-side,  and  each  had  two 


5-6 


floors  of  living  space.  These  quarters  came  in  several  types,  with  variations  in  size, 
placement  of  stairs,  and  inclusion  of  a  first  floor  half  bath.  These  standard  PCD  quar¬ 
ters  were  built  in  great  numbers  at  Army  installations  across  the  isthmus  from 
1939-1943.  For  this  reason  they  became  emblematic  of  military  officer  housing  in  the 
Canal  Zone  and  were  commonly  known  as  “tropical  duplexes.” 

The  electrical  distribution  system  for  these  houses  was 
upgraded  in  1965.  Nearly  all  the  tropical  duplex  quarters 
had  horizontal  sliding  aluminum  and/or  awning  windows 
installed  in  the  early  1970s,  replacing  the  earlier 
jalousie  windows. 


[5.08]  Interior  of  WWI  1-era  officer's  quarters 
showing  expansive  windows  and  the  use  of 
slatted  blinds  with  a  center  adjustment  rod, 
October  1957. 


[5.09]  Two  ‘Army  wives'  chat  in  a  kitchen  outfit¬ 
ted  with  Miami-type  jalousie  windows,  1950s. 


5-7 


The  first  wartime  housing  completed  was  a  set  of  NCO  quarters  (Buildings  301-306, 
309-316,  318-323,  325-340)  located  in  the  area  between  the  open  recreation  area 
and  the  200  area  barracks  [5.10].  The  quarters  were  placed  uniformly  along  three 
short  roads,  forming  a  compact  housing  area.  All  but  two  of  the  structures  were  two- 
family  duplexes,  each  with  two  bedrooms.  These  quarters  had  a  three-bay  configu¬ 
ration  measuring  24  x  44  ft.  The  other  two  were  for  senior  NCOs.  Building  307  was  a 
larger  structure  measuring  26.5  x  58  ft,  and  provided  two  families  with  three  bed¬ 
rooms  each.  Building  308  was  a  smaller  unit,  measuring  28  x  38  ft.  The  only  single¬ 
story  unit  built  on  Fort  Clayton  during  this  time  period,  Building  308  provided  two 
bedrooms  for  one  family  [5.11]. 


[5.10]  First  wartime  housing  to  be  completed: 
the  300  Area  NCO  quarters. 


[5.11]  NCO  single  quarters  (Building  308). 


5-8 


These  quarters  received  central  air 
conditioning  in  1977.  The  interior  and 
exterior  doors  were  replaced  in  1979. 
There  was  an  electrical  system  upgrade 
in  1983,  and  the  air  conditioning  was 
upgraded  in  1990. 

This  round  of  construction  also  provided  24  company 
officers’  quarters  (Buildings  401-414,  416-417,  419-424, 
427-428)  and  six  field  officers’  quarters  (Buildings  426, 
430-434)  [5.12].  Buildings  401-414  formed  a  block 
located  immediately  northeast  of  the  temporary  offi¬ 
cers’  quarters  (Buildings  88-92).  At  this  point,  the  ter¬ 
rain  started  to  become  hilly,  and  Morse  Road  (where  all 
these  quarters  were  located)  followed  the  crest  of  the 
hills  until  it  swept  downward  toward  the  Cardenas  River 
where  it  would  meet  up  with  Hospital  Road  just  before 
the  bridge.  The  remaining  quarters  (Buildings  416,  417, 
419-424,  426-428,  and  430-434)  were  somewhat  strung 
out  to  the  northeast  along  the  north  side  of  Morse  Road. 
The  field  officers’  quarters  were  placed  the  farthest 
along,  with  Building  434  across  the  street  and  partway 
up  a  high  hill.  The  dramatic  location  and  view  out  over 
the  river  valley  gave  this  structure  high  status,  and  it 
would  become  home  to  Fort  Clayton’s  Commanding 
Officer.  The  two-story  company  officers’  quarters  mea¬ 
sured  26.5  x  58  ft.  They  were  basically  the  same  as  the 
NCO  quarters  of  the  same  size  (Building  307)  but  had 
an  extra  half  bath  on  the  first  floor.  The  two-story  field 
officers’  quarters  were  single-family  units  measuring  28 
x  44  ft,  and  provided  four  bedrooms. 

The  interior  and  exterior  doors  of  the 
company  and  held  officers'  quarters  were 


[5.12]  Company  officers'  duplex  quarters 
(Buildings  411-413),  23  September  1953. 


replaced  in  1979,  and  central  air  conditioning  was 
installed  in  1988. 


[5.13]  Coast  Artillery  Headquarters  Building, 
Fort  Clayton,  October  1942. 


Wartime  Operations  and  Support  Facilities 
Coast  Artillery  Headquarters  (Building 200) 

Construction  of  Building  200,  the  Coast  Artillery  Headquarters  building,  by  the  firm 
of  Tucker,  McClure,  Thompson,  and  Markham  Company  of  Los  Angeles,  California, 
began  at  the  same  time  the  barracks  were  built  in  the  same  area  but  the  building 
was  not  completed  until  13  April  1942  [5.13,  5.14],  Located  between  the  new  Coast 
Artillery  barracks  and  the  quartermaster  area,  the  building  was  sited  on  a  knoll 
overlooking  the  new  parade  ground.  Constructed  at  a  cost  of  $31,000,  the  two-story 
building  contained  8802  sq  ft  and  measured  76  x  38  ft.  Like  the  Coast  Artillery  bar- 


5-9 


racks,  Building  200  was  built  on  a  concrete  foundation  with  concrete  floors  covered 
with  quarry  tile,  concrete  and  stucco  walls,  and  a  clay  tile  roof.  Similar  buildings 
were  constructed  at  Forts  Kobbe  and  Gulick.18 

The  building  was  fronted  by  a  porte-cochere  and  a  flag  pole.  The  first  floor  con¬ 
tained  a  front  entry  hall,  several  offices,  separate  restrooms  for  enlisted  men  and 
officers,  a  rear  entry  hall,  and  stairs  accessing  the  second  floor.  The  second  floor 
contained  a  closet,  an  officers’  restroom,  two  vaults,  and  several  offices. 

Sometime  before  1969  the  temporary  partitions  on  the 
second  floor  were  removed,  opening  up  a  large  space  that  was 
used  as  a  conference  room.  Three  small  spaces  remained, 
serving  as  offices  for  the  Post  Commander,  the  Executive 
Officer,  and  a  secretary.  The  vault  located  above  the  front 
entry  was  removed  and  the  space  converted  to  a  waiting 
room.  At  the  same  time,  exterior  wood  frame  and  screen  win¬ 
dows  were  replaced  with  glass.  In  1969  these  windows  were 
reduced  in  size  and  replaced  with  aluminum  awning  windows. 
Windows  were  further  reduced  in  size  in  1984  when  security 
screening  was  applied  to  openings.  The  building  received 
central  air  conditioning  in  1988,  at  which  time  the  build¬ 
ing  was  serving  as  headquarters  to  the  324th  Support  Group. 

Anti-Aircraft  Defense  Command  Post 

An  anti-aircraft  defense  (AAD)  command  post,  accompanied  by  Signal  Corps  radio 
transmitters,  was  established  at  Fort  Clayton  as  part  of  the  World  War  II  defense 
effort.  Located  on  what  came  to  be  called  “Gun  Hill,”  the  site  was  on  top  of  a  hill 
north  of  the  New  Post  area  [5.15] . 


[5.14]  Insignia  on  palm  trees  in  front  of  Building 
200. 


[5.15]  Anti-aircraft  Defense  Command  Post, 
Gun  Hill. 


5-10 


The  AAD  command  post  (Building  3056)  was  completed  in  March  1942.  The  under¬ 
ground  bunker  facility,  which  was  built  entirely  of  reinforced  concrete,  had  two 
entry  doors,  both  of  which  connected  to  an  interior  horizontal  corridor.  The  facility 
included  a  powder  room,  battery  room,  switchboard  room,  radio  room,  command¬ 
ing  officer’s  consultation  room,  and  both  enlisted  men’s  and  officers’  latrines.  The 
bunker  was  air-conditioned  and  gas-proofed.  In  addition  to  the  command  post,  the 
site  included  a  Quonset  hut  (Building  3055),  revetment  (Facility  3057),  metal  shed 
(Building  3058),  ammunition  storage  facility  (Building  3061),  and  two  antennas.19  In 
December  1943  eight  magazines  were  constructed  along  the  road  to  the  AAD  com¬ 
mand  post.  These  small  structures  measured  8  x  8  ft,  and  were  constructed  of  con¬ 
crete,  concrete  block,  and  corrugated  iron. 

By  1973  the  site  had  been  transferred  to  the  Military 
Police,  who  used  it  as  a  kennel  and  training  area  for 
police  dogs  [5.16].  The  Quonset  hut  was  a  shelter  facility 
with  12  kennels,  and  included  a  food  preparation  room, 
treatment  room,  and  two  isolation  kennels.  In  1998  an 
obstacle  course  for  the  dogs  was  constructed.  Obstacles 
included  a  window,  barrel,  tunnel,  jump,  and  an  A-frame 
set  of  steps.  The  AAD  magazines  were  demolished  in  1975. 

Aircraft  Fuel  Storage  Facilities 

In  1943  the  Panama  Canal  War  Reserve  area  at  Fort  Clayton  was  established.  Used 
as  an  aircraft  fuel  storage  facility,  the  11  underground  steel  tanks  were  managed  by 
the  Army  Air  Corps  at  Albrook  Field. 

The  site  was  officially  transferred  to  the  U.S.  Army  at 
Fort  Clayton  in  1974.  In  June  1977  the  site  became  a  test 
facility  for  the  Tropic  Test  Center  (TTC) .  The  U.S.  Army 


[5.16]  A  military  police  dog  at  work. 


5-11 


TTC  was  first  established  in  1964,  probably  in  conjunction 
with  increasing  U.S.  involvement  in  Vietnam,  with  test 
sites  scattered  across  the  isthmus.  The  sites  making  up 
the  TTC  contained  facilities  for  determining  the  effects 
of  a  humid  tropical  climate  on  various  Army  products  and 
materiel.  The  TTC  was  headquartered  at  East  Corozal,  and 
the  various  other  sites  were  used  for  their  particular 
environmental  qualities  (marine,  forest,  etc.).  Location 
of  the  facility  at  Fort  Clayton  was  due  to  installation 
realignments  made  necessary  by  the  Panama  Canal  Treaty  and 
the  availability  of  USARSO  troops  for  inflicting  'tropical 
treatment'  on  the  equipment.20 

Searchlight  Sheds  and  Regimental  Garages 

A  number  of  projects  were  begun  in  1941  but  not  completed  until  1942.  Located  in 
the  Artillery  Park  area  of  Fort  Clayton,  this  round  of  construction  included  three 
searchlight  sheds,  two  standard  regimental  garages,  an  ordnance  storehouse, 
artillery  engineer’s  warehouse,  quartermaster  maintenance  and  motor  repair  shop, 
and  temporary  shed  [5.17,  5.18],  The  three  searchlight  sheds  (Buildings  183-185) 
and  two  standard  three-car  regimental  garages  (Buildings  181  and  182)  were  avail¬ 
able  for  use  on  13  January  1942.  These  five  buildings,  constructed  under  contract  to 
Novey  and  Luttrell  Company,  were  laid  out  longitudinally  parallel  to  each  other.  An 
asphalt  road  encircled  the  complex  of  buildings.  Each  of  the  five  buildings  mea¬ 
sured  109  x  30  ft.  Constructed  on  a  concrete  foundation,  floors  were  reinforced  con¬ 
crete  slabs.  Each  building  was  enclosed  and  supported  an  asbestos-protected  metal 
roof  on  steel  trusses. 

Warehouses 

The  Ordnance  Storehouse  (Building  179),  located  in  the  Artillery  Park,  was 
accepted  from  the  contractor,  Fred  J.  Early,  Jr.,  of  San  Francisco,  California,  on  12 
January  1942.  The  storehouse  was  sited  perpendicular  to  the  regimental  garages 


[5.17]  Searchlights  of  Battery  C,  4th  Coast  Artillery  Corps,  on  exhibit  at  [5.18]  Standard  regimental  garages  and  searchlight  sheds, 
a  Panama  Canal  Department  Review. 


5-12 


and  searchlight  sheds,  and  it  was  similar  to  them  in  design.  Running  through  the 
center  of  the  single  large  storeroom  was  a  two-ton  monorail.  A  double  wood  sliding 
door  was  located  at  each  end  of  the  building. 

The  Artillery  Engineer  Warehouse,  Building  180,  was  a  183  x  62  ft  facility  divided  up 
the  middle  by  a  concrete  firewall,  which  provided  two  storage  rooms  accessed  from 
outside  by  two  loading  platforms  with  10  x  10  ft  sliding  doors.  The  roof  was  APM, 
the  preferred  roofing  material  for  storehouses  at  that  time.  The  storage  facility, 
which  also  contained  an  office  space,  was  used  to  store  food  and  other  perishable 
items  for  sale  at  the  nearby  commissary. 

In  1965  Building  180  was  modified  and  redesignated  as  a 
craft  shop,  which  comprised  a  wood  shop,  auto  shop,  and 
photo  lab.  In  19  83  the  shop  was  expanded  to  include  a  tool 
room,  studio  classroom,  sculpture  studio,  and  portrait 
studio. 


The  Quartermaster  Maintenance  and  Motor  Repair  Shop  (Building  176)  was  con¬ 
structed  by  Novey  and  Luttrell  and  delivered  on  13  January  1942.  The  building  was 
located  in  the  quartermaster  area  at  the  intersection  of  Vick  and  Coiner  Streets  near 
the  engineer  motor  pool  [5.19].  Constructed  of  reinforced  concrete  and  steel  with  a 
roof  of  APM  on  steel  trusses  and  frame,  the  building  measured  297  x  36  ft.  The  out¬ 
side  walls  were  8  in.  concrete  block.  The  interior  of  the  building  was  divided  into  15 
bays,  and  included  an  office,  storage  room,  electrical  shop,  plumbing  shop,  carpen¬ 
ter  shop,  paint  shop,  auto  painting  area,  and  other  minor  spaces.  The  construction 
of  this  building  was  undertaken  in  order  to  replace  several  small  wood  structures 
built  between  1920  and  1923. 

The  construction  of  Building  177  in  March  1942  completed  the  quartermaster  area  of 
Fort  Clayton.  Originally  planned  and  designed  as  a  hay  shed  before  it  was  com¬ 
pleted  the  building’s  function  was  changed  to  a  storehouse  for  food  supplies. 
Located  immediately  south  of  the  commissary  building,  the  new  storehouse  was 
laid  out  parallel  to  the  new  railroad  spur  to  accommodate  loading  and  unloading  of 


[5.19]  Quartermaster  maintenance  and  motor 
repair  shop. 


5-13 


materials.  Unlike  the  other  buildings  in  the  quartermaster  area,  Building  177  was  a 
temporary  structure  on  a  concrete  foundation  with  drop  siding  walls.  The  top  2  ft  of 
the  walls  surrounding  the  building  were  opened  for  ventilation,  screened  with  wire 
for  security  and  protection  against  mosquitoes.  The  metal  roof  provided  an  over¬ 
hang  to  prevent  rain  from  entering  the  windows  and  ventilation  openings.  The 
building  was  bisected  by  a  firewall  and  enclosed  nearly  20,000  sq  ft. 

Wartime  Community  Buildings 
BowlingAlley 

A  new  bowling  alley  (Building  101)  was  completed  in  1943  to  replace  the  old  one. 
Constructed  on  a  concrete  foundation  with  concrete  floors,  concrete-and-screen 
walls,  and  a  wood-and-tarpaper  roof,  the  new  8-lane  bowling  center  was  twice  the 
size  of  the  old  facility.  It  was  located  on  Morse  Avenue  next  to  Building  172  (the  fire 
station). 

The  bowling  alley  received  various  modifications  and 
rehabilitations  throughout  the  55  years  of  its  life, 
including  the  addition  of  a  snack  bar  in  1982  and  the 
installation  of  central  air  conditioning  in  1987.  In  1959 
the  mediagua,  which  encircled  the  sides  and  rear  of  the 
building,  was  removed  and  the  large  screened  windows  were 
enclosed  with  decorative  concrete  block.  Automatic  ball 
returns  and  hand  dryers  were  installed  in  1964. 

Post  Chapel 

Completed  in  January  1944,  the  Fort  Clayton  Post  Chapel  (Building  64)  was  a  stan¬ 
dard  temporary  wood  frame  structure.  Constructed  at  an  estimated  cost  of  $15,000, 
the  building  enclosed  3202  sq  ft  and  accommodated  500  persons.  Measuring  118  x 
27  ft,  the  chapel  was  built  on  a  concrete  foundation,  with  concrete  and  wood  floors, 
wood  and  screen  walls,  and  a  roof  of  corrugated  iron.  Other  chapels  of  this  stan¬ 
dard  design  were  constructed  at  several  military  bases  in  the  Canal  Zone,  including 
Corozal  and  Fort  Amador.  The  Fort  Clayton  chapel  included  a  mahogany  pulpit, 
lectern,  communion  rail,  confessional,  and  pews  with  knee-rests.  The  two  offices 
were  finished  in  cement  plaster. 

In  1953  the  chapel  was  enlarged  to  measure  118x36  ft.  This 
temporary  structure  was  demolished  and  replaced  with  a 
permanent  structure  in  1964. 

The  Canal  Zone  Medical  Construction  Program 
The  Long  Struggle  for  Dedicated  Military  Hospitals 

For  military  forces  stationed  in  tropical  settings,  where  serious  communicable  dis¬ 
eases  thrive,  medical  care  is  an  ongoing  high  priority  in  order  to  sustain  combat 
readiness.  In  Panama,  the  single  largest  construction  project  completed  during  this 


5-14 


period  was  a  medical  complex  anchored  by  Building  519,  the  528-bed  Sector  Hospi¬ 
tal  at  Fort  Clayton.  The  Sector  Hospital  was  the  largest  of  three  constructed  for  mili¬ 
tary  forces  in  the  Canal  Zone  during  the  war  years.  The  long  struggle  for 
authorization  and  construction  of  dedicated  military  hospitals  in  the  Canal  Zone 
dated  back  almost  to  the  earliest  days  of  canal  defense,  and  involved  repeated 
debates  and-finally-a  war  of  letters  between  the  Panama  Canal  Department  and 
The  Panama  Canal. 

The  debate  was  foreshadowed  in  March  1917  by  Brigadier  General  Clarence  R. 
Edwards,  commander  of  U.S.  troops  in  the  Canal  Zone: 

Because  protection  of  the  canal  cannot  be  separated  in  essence  from  other 
Canal  functions,  matters  must  frequently  arise  concerning  which,  properly 
enough,  different  opinions  may  be  held.  In  this  event  such  matters  are  certain  to 
become  the  subject  of  more  or  less  extensive  correspondence  or  debate,  and  at 
times,  perhaps,  of  serious  disagreement 33 

On  30  June  1921  the  U.S.  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives  addressed  the  issue 
of  medical  treatment  for  military  personnel  assigned  to  the  Canal  Zone.  Funds  were 
allocated  to  The  Panama  Canal  to  provide  medical  care  for  military  personnel  in 
Gorgas  Hospital  on  the  Pacific  side  of  the  isthmus,  and  in  Margarita  Hospital  on  the 
Atlantic  side.  Both  of  these  hospitals  were  owned  and  managed  by  the  Canal  Zone 
government.  In  addition  to  civilian  medical  personnel,  Gorgas  Hospital  was  staffed 
by  Army  doctors  on  4-year  assignments.  These  military  professionals  drew  their  reg¬ 
ular  Army  pay  as  if  they  were  stationed  at  a  military  hospital  but  they  ultimately 
were  accountable  to  the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal,  not  the  Commanding  Gen¬ 
eral  of  the  Panama  Canal  Department. 

Treatment  of  minor  illnesses,  minor  injuries,  and  dental  care  was  provided  at  post 
dispensaries.  One  of  Fort  Clayton’s  dispensaries  was  a  25-bed  temporary  wood 
building  located  near  the  future  site  of  Building  519,  and  a  second  dispensary  was 
located  in  Building  21.  But  nowhere  within  the  Panama  Canal  Department  was  there 
a  dedicated  medical  facility  for  inpatient  acute  care. 

As  early  as  1920  installation  commanders  requested  authority  to  build  military  hospi¬ 
tals,  justifying  their  requests  by  asserting  that  “reliance  upon  the  civilian  treatment 
facilities  at  Gorgas  Hospital  [is]  detrimental  to  command  efficiency.”34  Officials  of  the 
Canal  Zone  government,  however,  objected  to  the  construction  of  dedicated  military 
hospitals  arguing  that  Gorgas  and  Margarita  hospitals  met  the  medical  requirements 
of  military  personnel,  their  family  members,  and  civilians  working  on  installations. 

As  the  number  of  military  personnel  assigned  to  the  Canal  Zone  rose  from  one 
Marine  battalion  in  1903  to  nearly  10,000  soldiers  in  1935,  the  Chief  Health  Officer  of 
The  Panama  Canal  realized  that  the  cost  of  providing  medical  care  would  be 
extreme.  After  World  War  I  many  Canal  Zone  military  leaders  began  to  have  reserva¬ 
tions  about  treating  troops  at  Gorgas  Hospital.  One  of  the  greatest  concerns,  though 
not  the  only  one,  was  financial.  In  1939  alone  the  Army  paid  The  Panama  Canal 
$233,391  in  hospitalization  fees. 


5-15 


Another  Wartime  Challenge:  Disease  and  Medicine  in  the  Tropics 


Leading  the  fight  against  disease  in 
the  Canal  Zone  were  the  staff  of  the 
Army  Medical  Department.  The  pri¬ 
mary  mission  of  the  Army  Medical 
Department,  dating  back  to  its 
inception  during  the  Revolutionary 
War,  was  to  maintain  the  health  of 
the  Army  in  order  to  protect  its 
fighting  strength  and  therefore  sus¬ 
tain  its  readiness  for  war.  The  only 
changes  in  mission  since  that  time 
have  been  in  the  scope  of  the  task 
and  the  circumstances  in  which  the 
mission  must  be  accomplished. 
Responsibility  for  the  execution  of 
this  mission  was  vested  in  the  Sur¬ 
geon  General.21 

Yellow  fever  had  been  one  of  the 
major  killers  of  the  French  canal 
construction  effort.  Although  the 
Isthmian  Canal  Commission  and  the 
heroic  efforts  of  Dr.  William  C.  Gor- 
gas  eradicated  yellow  fever  from  the 
area,  other  tropical  diseases  contin¬ 
ued  to  plague  residents  of  the  Canal 
Zone.  Beginning  in  1939,  the  huge 
prewar  troop  influx  once  again 
brought  health  issues  to  the  fore¬ 
front  of  military  concerns  in  the 
Canal  Zone.  Among  the  diseases 
transmitted  by  insects,  malaria  was 
the  most  common  and  was  one  of 
the  top  three  illnesses  treated  by 
doctors  during  the  era.  The  other 
two  were  tuberculosis— the  leading 
cause  of  death  in  the  Republic  of 
Panama— and  venereal  disease.22 


“Recipe fora  Malaria 
Cocktail:  Mix  quinine, 
syrup,  red  food  dye, 
and  alcohol.  Serve  in 
bottles  on  restaurant 
tables  for  patrons.”23 


Malaria.  The  number  of  diagnosed 
malaria  cases  in  military  personnel 
sharply  rose  as  large  numbers  of 
new  troops  were  stationed  to  the 
Canal  Zone  and  vicinity.  Due  to  the 
scarcity  of  billeting  and  construction 
materials,  non-immune  troops  were 
often  assigned  to  mosquito-infested 
areas  before  adequate  protection 
could  be  provided.  Between  April 
and  September  1942  malaria  reached 
epidemic  proportions  among  the 
troops,  but  soon  after  this  the  num¬ 
ber  of  new  cases  began  to  decline.24 
At  the  height  of  the  epidemic  111.7  of 
every  1000  individuals  were  being 
treated  for  malaria.25  The  problem 
was  so  serious  that  training  and 
maneuvers  were  often  cancelled. 
Leaders  of  the  military  communities 
in  the  Canal  Zone  recognized  “the 
absolute  necessity  of  malaria  disci¬ 
pline  and  control.”26  Funds  in  the 
amount  of  $800,000  were  appropri¬ 
ated  during  fiscal  years  (FY)  1945 
and  1946  for  malaria  control  efforts.27 


At  outpost  stations,  a  single  case  of 
malaria  resulted  in  the  implementa¬ 
tion  of  a  dusk-to-dawn  curfew  [5.20]. 
Those  soldiers  on  guard  duty  were 
required  to  wear  gloves  and  netting 
around  their  heads.  No  part  of  the 
body  could  be  exposed  to  a  possible 
mosquito  bite.  Troops  were  required 
to  sleep  under  mosquito  netting,  and 
bed  checks  were  made  to  make  sure 
soldiers  were  following  regulations.28 

US.  Army  School  of  Malariology. 
As  military  campaigns  expanded 
into  the  Southwest  Pacific  during 
1943  there  was  a  sharp  increase  in 
the  need  for  training  in  tropical  dis¬ 
ease  control  and  mitigation.  A  plan 
to  create  an  Army  school  of  malari¬ 
ology  at  Fort  Clayton  was  initiated 
during  the  summer  of  1943  and 
authorized  in  September.  In  addi¬ 
tion  to  the  theoretical  training  it 
would  offer,  a  malariology  school  in 
the  Canal  Zone  would  provide  prac¬ 
tical  field  experience  in  a  tropical 
environment.  Trainees  could  learn 
in  a  setting  where  anti-malaria  initia¬ 
tives  had  been  tried  and  used  suc¬ 
cessfully  for  years.  The  Caribbean 
Defense  Command  provided  opera¬ 
tional  and  teaching  personnel  for 
the  school.  The  latter  included  sani¬ 
tary  engineers,  entomologists,  and 
parasitologists.  Activated  in  Febru¬ 
ary  1944,  the  school  offered  a  4- 
week  course  of  study  emphasizing 
malaria  survey  and  control  tech- 


5-16 


[5.20]  Patients  in  ward  for  malaria  prevention  in  a  hospital  at  an  outpost  position, 
February  1943. 


niques  as  well  as  basic  theoretical 
topics.  By  the  end  of  the  war,  16 
courses  for  officers  had  been  com¬ 
pleted,  and  the  graduates  of  these 
courses  were  instrumental  in  imple¬ 
menting  the  Army’s  malaria-control 
program.29 

The  educational  complex  was  loca¬ 
ted  in  three  barracks  buildings  at 
Fort  Clayton.  The  first  of  these  con¬ 
tained  the  school’s  administrative 
offices,  a  lecture  room  that  accom¬ 
modated  about  80  people,  various 
classrooms,  two  laboratories,  a  con¬ 
ference  room,  and  a  library.  The  sec¬ 
ond  building  provided  billeting  and 
mess  facilities  for  enlisted  faculty 
and  students.  The  third  building  was 


dedicated  to  additional  billeting, 
both  for  enlisted  personnel  and  offi¬ 
cers.  The  U.S.  Army  School  of  Malari- 
ology  continued  its  mission  well  into 
the  1960s  as  part  of  the  U.S.  Army 
Medical  Research  and  Development 
Command.  As  such,  it  is  credited 
with  devising  more  accurate  labora¬ 
tory  methods  for  identifying,  testing, 
and  treating  a  variety  of  tropical 
infectious  and  parasitic  diseases.30 

Venereal  Disease*  Venereal  disease 
was  prevalent  among  Canal  Zone 
troops  as  early  as  World  War  I,  and 
the  number  of  cases  escalated  dra¬ 
matically  during  the  early  years  of 
the  prewar  buildup.  By  1939  there 
were  44.5  cases  diagnosed  per 


month,  but  the  rate  of  infection 
began  to  drop  between  1941  and 

1942,  and  decreased  again  by  June 

1943.  Decreases  were  continuous, 
reaching  a  low  of  9.3  cases  per  thou¬ 
sand  per  year  in  August  1945,  which 
was  actually  lower  than  the  rate  in 
the  United  States  during  the  same 
time  period.  The  decline  was  attrib¬ 
uted  to  several  factors,  including 
education  of  troops  in  causes  and 
symptoms  of  the  disease,  improve¬ 
ments  in  treatment  methods,  and  the 
cooperation  and  support  of  the 
Panama  Canal  Department  Comman¬ 
der,  the  Chief  Health  Officer  of  The 
Panama  Canal,  and  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  Republic  of  Panama.31 

Other  Tropical  Maladies .  In  addi¬ 
tion  to  treating  malaria,  tuberculosis, 
and  venereal  disease,  military  doc¬ 
tors  saw  and  treated  cases  of  typhoid, 
dysentery,  measles,  mumps,  whoop¬ 
ing  cough,  chicken  pox,  and  fungus 
infections.  By  far,  the  most  common 
kind  of  disease  afflicting  Canal  Zone 
soldiers  during  this  era  was  respira¬ 
tory  infection.  In  1940,  835  individu¬ 
als  were  admitted  to  a  dispensary; 
approximately  187  cases  of  respirar 
tory  infection  were  treated,  com¬ 
pared  to  about  56  cases  of  malaria,  66 
cases  of  venereal  disease,  and  116 
injuries.  During  the  first  four  months 
following  the  opening  of  the  hospital 
at  Fort  Clayton,  doctors  there  were 
treating  primarily  cases  of  bronchitis 
and  tonsillitis.32 


5-17 


In  1922  a  proposal  was  submitted  to  the  War  Department  that  the  Army  either  be 
authorized  to  run  its  own  hospitals  or  that  Gorgas  Hospital  to  be  transferred  to  the 
Army  for  administration.  The  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  objected,  noting  that 
civilian  patients  outnumbered  military  patients  by  a  very  wide  margin 35  By  1937  the 
Panama  Canal  Department  Commanding  General  had  the  support  of  the  Surgeon 
General  in  his  request  for  separation  of  hospital  services  from  The  Panama  Canal. 
Nevertheless,  the  War  Department  determined  in  June  1938  that  “a  material 
increase  in  hospitalization  facilities  in  the  Panama  Canal  Department  is  not  of  suffi¬ 
ciently  high  priority  to  warrant  action  at  this  time.”36  However,  the  Surgeon  General 
soon  argued  his  case  to  the  War  Department  and  was  successful  in  getting  the  deci¬ 
sion  reversed.  Although  individual  care  may  have  been  satisfactory  in  normal  cir¬ 
cumstances,  said  the  Surgeon  General,  a  dedicated  military  hospital  in  the  Canal 
Zone  would  be  imperative  during  war. 

Construction  of  three  military  hospitals  in  the  Canal  Zone  was  included  in  the  1939 
$50  million  defense  augmentation  program  for  new  construction.  In  March  1939  the 
Panama  Canal  Department  was  notified  that  the  proposal  was  approved.  Response 
from  Governor  Ridley  of  the  Panama  Canal  Zone  was  almost  immediate.  On  25  April 
1939  Ridley  addressed  a  five-and-a-half-page  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  War  with  a 
copy  furnished  to  the  Commanding  General  of  the  Panama  Canal  Department.  In 
this  letter  the  Governor  opposed  the  construction  of  these  new  military  hospitals 
because  it  would  create  a  duplication  of  facilities,  equipment,  and  personnel  that 
were  already  available  at  Gorgas  Hospital.  In  Ridley’s  opinion: 

[T]he  decision  to  request  funds  for  the  construction  of  two  more  general  hospi¬ 
tals  in  the  Canal  Zone  has  been  made  without  weighing  all  of  the  important  con¬ 
siderations  upon  which  final  conclusions  should  be  made.  I  believe  the  whole 
matter  should  be  carefully  reconsidered  so  that  all  of  the  effects  may  be  fore¬ 
seen  before  the  Department  becomes  committed  to  large  expense  for  the  initial 
duplication  of  available  hospital  facilities  as  well  as  for  the  continuing  expense 
of  additional  personnel,  which  the  present  scheme  would  entail.  I  feel  sure  if  the 
project  is  consummated  without  advising  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget  and  Con¬ 
gress  of  the  facts  as  outlined  herein,  there  will  be  a  reaction  unfavorable  to  the 
Army  as  well  as  The  Panama  Canal.37 

The  PCD  Commanding  General,  Major  General  David  L.  Stone,  responded  to  the  Gov¬ 
ernor’s  letter,  somewhat  indirectly,  with  one  of  his  own  addressed  to  the  Surgeon  Gen¬ 
eral,  dated  27  April  1939.  General  Stone  cited  the  large  number  of  troops  expected  in 
the  Canal  Zone  in  anticipation  of  war  and  asserted  that  Gorgas  Hospital  would  not  be 
able  to  accommodate  this  increased  population.  He  also  pointed  out  that  the  Third 
Locks  project  would  drastically  increase  the  population  in  the  Canal  Zone,  further 
overloading  the  existing  civilian  inpatient  facilities.  Finally,  General  Stone  accused  Rid¬ 
ley  of  being  more  concerned  about  loss  of  hospital  revenue  than  anything  else. 

In  his  letter  to  the  Surgeon  General,  Stone  provided  some  additional  background 
that  helps  to  explain  his  own  vehemence  on  this  issue.  At  an  earlier  Army-Navy- 
Canal  Zone  Joint  Defense  Plan  meeting,  Stone  explained,  Governor  Ridley  had 
declared  that  “the  needs  of  the  employees  on  the  Canal  Zone,  both  white  and  col- 


5-18 


ored,  would  be  given  priority  at  Gorgas  Hospital  and  the  Army  and  Navy  patients 
would  be  given  such  accommodations  as  remained  after  the  needs  of  the  Canal 
Zone  employees  were  met.”38  Stone  made  it  clear  that  PCD  military  leadership 
could  not  tolerate  “any  such  arrangement  whereby  our  men,  who  are  defending  the 
canal,  would  be  left  in  such  a  secondary  and  uncertain  status  as  to  hospitaliza¬ 
tion.”39  In  response  to  Stone’s  letter,  the  Surgeon  General  supported  the  PCD 
request  for  control  of  its  own  military  medical  facilities.40 

The  Secretary  of  War  finally  settled  the  matter  after  making  an  inspection  of  Panama 
Canal  Department  installations  and  reviewing  its  defense  plans  in  August  1939.  The 
Secretary  fully  supported  the  PCD  military  leadership,  and  the  War  Department  offi¬ 
cially  approved  the  construction  of  the  Fort  Gulick  Hospital,  with  250-beds,  on  26 
August  1939.  Approval  for  the  construction  of  the  Fort  Clayton  Hospital,  with  a 
capacity  of  300  beds  plus  and  ancillary  facilities  such  as  nurses’  quarters,  was 
granted  on  30  September  1939. 

The  funding  approved  for  the  Fort  Clayton  facilities  totaled  $475,000,  but  it  turned 
out  that  this  was  not  enough  money  to  complete  the  job  because  of  a  problem  with 
the  estimate.  A  staff  officer  had  originally  estimated  the  funding  requirement  with¬ 
out  consulting  the  Medical  Department,  the  Surgeon  General,  or  the  Quartermaster 
General.  The  staff  officer’s  construction  cost  estimate  was  $4000  per  bed,  but  this 
turned  out  to  be  20  percent  lower  than  the  Quartermaster  General’s  more  accurate 
figure  of  $5000  per  bed.  The  PCD’s  original  underestimate  carried  through  to  an 
extra  100  beds  that  would  be  needed  for  Army  Air  Corps  personnel,  who  were  sta¬ 
tioned  at  the  adjacent  Albrook  Field  and  would  be  using  the  new  Fort  Clayton  Hos¬ 
pital  facilities.  The  Air  Corps  contributed  $400,000,  or  $4000  per  bed,  to  defray 
construction  costs  of  these  extra  100  beds-again,  20  percent  below  the  actual  per- 
bed  construction  cost.  Plans  for  the  number  of  beds  in  each  hospital  were  based  on 
both  peacetime  and  wartime  estimates.  The  original  plans  for  the  Fort  Clayton  hos¬ 
pital  had  called  for  528  beds,  but  by  the  time  Congress  finally  authorized  funds  the 
construction  costs  had  increased  and,  consequently,  the  number  of  beds  had  to  be 
reduced  to  stay  within  budget. 

Starting  even  before  construction  was  authorized,  representatives  of  the  PCD  Office 
of  the  Quartermaster  General,  the  Surgeon’s  Office,  and  the  Constructing  Quarter¬ 
master’s  Office  conducted  land  surveys  of  the  area  in  1938,  1939,  and  early  1940. 
The  main  purpose  of  these  surveys  was  to  select  appropriate  sites  for  the  hospitals 
proposed  at  Fort  Gulick,  Howard  Field/Fort  Kobbe,  and  Fort  Clayton.  Considera¬ 
tions  in  hospital  site  selection  included  elevation  (preferably  at  least  150  ft);  orienta¬ 
tion  (an  east-west  axis  was  preferred  in  order  to  capture  prevailing  winds  for 
ventilation);  view  (restful  yet  panoramic);  and  proximity  (partial  seclusion  was  pre¬ 
ferred  to  isolate  patients  from  installation  activity  and  noise).41 

Site  Selection 

The  Quartermaster  General  of  the  Army  visited  the  site  selected  for  the  Fort  Clayton 
hospital  in  early  1940.  It  was  located  about  a  quarter-mile  from  the  officers’  quarters 
on  Muir  Avenue.  After  evaluating  the  site  he  notified  the  Commanding  General  that  a 


5-19 


new  location  should  be  sought  because,  due  to  the  site’s  high  elevation,  it  would  be 
too  costly  to  prepare  for  construction.  In  accordance  with  the  Quartermaster  Gen¬ 
eral  s  opinion,  a  new  site  on  the  other  side  of  the  Cardenas  River  was  selected,  and 
this  new  site  was  formally  approved  on  8  May  1940.  Located  on  the  southeast  side  of 
the  post  near  a  stretch  of  the  historic  Las  Cruces  Trail,  the  new  hilltop  site  met  the 
desired  criteria  for  promoting  good  ventilation  and  a  restful  environment  [5.21], 

This  choice  of  location  did,  however,  require  construction  of  a  new  steel-and-con- 
crete  bridge  over  the  Cardenas  River.  This  structure  carried  Hospital  Road  26  ft 
above  the  river.  Drawings  for  the  bridge  were  prepared  in  July  1940,  and  construc¬ 
tion  began  shortly  afterward. 

The  Sector  Hospital  (Building  519) 

Based  in  part  on  a  request  by  the  PCD  Commanding  General  it  was  decided  that  the 
new  hospitals  would  be  permanent  structures  designed  in  the  tropical  style.  The 
Planning  and  Training  Division  of  the  Surgeon  General’s  Office  developed  plans  for 

[5.21]  Map  of  Fort  Clayton  (c.  1943)  showing 
prevailing  winds. 


5-20 


hospital  construction  and  repair  in  conjunction  with  the  Office  of  the  Quartermas¬ 
ter  General.  Final  architectural  plans  for  the  buildings  were  drawn  by  the  Surgeon 
General’s  Office.  A  complete  set  of  architectural  and  engineering  plans  for  the  hos¬ 
pitals  was  turned  over  to  the  Panama  Canal  Department  in  1940. 

On  2  November  1940  the  PCD  Quartermaster  General  authorized  the  letting  of  con¬ 
tracts  for  the  construction  of  the  three  hospitals.  As  a  result,  contracts  were 
awarded  to  MacDonald  Construction  Company  and  G.  L.  Tarlton,  Inc.,  and  grading 
and  construction  began  at  all  three  sites. 

The  Fort  Clayton  Sector  Hospital  (Building  519)  opened  on  3  September  1943.  Its 
nominal  capacity  of  378  beds  was  expanded  to  700  beds  by  placing  cots  on  the 
porches.  The  dispensary  at  Fort  Amador  immediately  transferred  349  patients  to  the 
hospital,  and  by  December  the  hospital  census  had  climbed  to  585  patients.  The 
cost  of  construction  was  about  $2.5  million  [5.22, 5.23] . 


a  [5.22]  Fort  Clayton  Sector  Hospital  (front  view) 

shortly  after  completion  (c.  1943). 


[5.23]  Fort  Clayton  Sector  Hospital  (rear  view) 
shortly  after  completion  (c.  1943). 


5-21 


The  hospital  contained  249,049  sq  ft,  making  it  the  largest  single  building  in  the 
Canal  Zone.  (The  Panama  Canal  Commission  Administration  Building  in  Balboa,  by 
comparison,  contained  only  75,000  sq  ft.42)  The  structure  measured  514.5  x  62  ft. 
The  foundation  was  of  concrete,  with  concrete  and  tile  floors,  stucco  and  concrete 
walls,  and  a  clay  tile  roof.  The  facility  was  designed  to  be  fireproof  and  impervious 
to  termites.  The  main  entrance  comprised  a  pair  of  massive  bronze  doors  which, 
according  to  one  senior  building  custodian,  required  14  men  to  remove  for  mainte¬ 
nance  and  repair  purposes.43 

The  hospital  faced  north,  with  east,  west,  and  south  wings.  The  south  wing  was 
three  stories  tall  and  the  east  and  west  wings  were  each  five  stories  tall.  The  main 
building  was  seven  stories  high  (in  addition  to  the  ground  floor).  The  ground  floor, 
which  housed  the  lobby,  was  finished  in  marble  and  brass  and  furnished  with 
locally  made  mahogany  chairs  and  settees.  In  addition  to  the  lobby,  the  ground 
floor  housed  an  information  office,  Red  Cross  office,  registrar’s  office,  outpatient 
clinics,  receiving  and  disposition  office,  medical  supply  area,  a  number  of  storage 
and  utility  rooms,  and  the  mortuary  and  autopsy  room.  The  Otis  elevator  off  the 
ground  floor  lobby  was  not  the  original  one  purchased  for  the  building;  the  first  one 
was  “lost  to  hostile  submarine  action  while  en  route  to  the  Canal  Zone.”44 

The  first  floor  of  the  hospital  (above  the  ground  floor)  contained  a  lobby  finished  in 
marble;  a  telephone  exchange;  the  dental,  eyes-ears-nose-and-throat,  and  dermatol¬ 
ogy  clinics;  cardiac  and  metabolic  clinics;  pharmacy;  bakery;  refrigerators;  attend¬ 
ing  surgeon’s  office;  and  air  conditioning  machinery.  The  east  wing  on  this  floor 
housed  two  24-bed  wards,  two  triple  rooms,  two  single  rooms  with  adjoining  baths, 
a  nurses’  room  with  adjoining  toilet,  a  small  serving  kitchen,  and  toilets  and  baths 
for  the  two  wards.  Also  on  this  floor  was  the  PCD  dental  laboratory. 

Air  conditioning  was  in  its  earliest  and  experimental  stage  of  use,  but  it  was  consid¬ 
ered  a  requirement  for  some  areas  of  the  hospital.  Those  areas  included  parts  of  the 
dental  clinic  where  delicate  and  expensive  instruments  would  deteriorate  without 
some  type  of  humidity  control.  The  majority  of  the  Dental  Corps  was  assigned  to 
the  dental  clinic  at  the  Fort  Clayton  hospital.  In  order  to  provide  dental  care  to  sol¬ 
diers  at  installations  out  of  range  of  the  Panama  Canal  Zone  (i.e.,  the  temporary 
bases  established  outside  the  Canal  Zone  for  wartime  defense  purposes),  a  mobile 
dental  unit  was  established. 

The  second  floor  contained  112  beds  laid  out  similarly  to  the  ward  area  of  the  first 
floor.  The  south  wing  of  the  second  floor  included  a  cafeteria-style  256-seat  mess 
hall  with  kitchen,  mess  office,  and  scullery. 

The  third  floor  of  the  hospital  included  two  wards  similar  to  those  on  the  first  and 
second  floors,  as  well  as  three  air  conditioned  operating  rooms,  a  radiology  depart¬ 
ment,  a  room  for  cystoscopy,  and  a  room  for  application  of  orthopedic  prostheses. 
The  ward  in  the  east  wing  was  used  for  the  care  of  male  officers. 

On  the  fourth  floor  was  located  an  air  conditioned  obstetrical  section,  which 
included  a  delivery  room,  labor  room,  double  and  single  rooms,  sterilizing  and  util- 


5-22 


ity  rooms,  serving  kitchen,  nursery,  baby  bath,  and  nurse’s  station.  Also  on  the 
fourth  floor  were  facilities  for  the  care  of  psychiatric  patients.  The  12-bed  psychiatric 
ward  included  two  single  rooms  for  severely  incapacitated  patients  and  two  single 
isolation  rooms.  Post-surgical  patients  were  also  cared  for  on  the  fourth  floor. 

The  fifth  floor  of  the  hospital  included  a  medical  reading  room  with  four  cubicles,  a 
general  reading  room,  librarian’s  office,  and  men’s  and  women’s  toilets.  The  south 
wing  of  the  fifth  floor  contained  an  assembly  room  with  seating  for  250  people, 
stage  with  disappearing  footlights,  dressing  room,  and  small  serving  kitchen.  The 
assembly  room  was  used  frequently  for  the  showing  of  pictures  and  for  USO 
(United  Service  Organizations)  shows  touring  the  area.  The  original  fifth  floor  east 
and  north  wings  included  storage  rooms  and  elevator  machinery  rooms. 

The  sixth  floor  center  area  included  a  recreation  room  equipped  with  radios,  bil¬ 
liard  and  ping-pong  tables,  lounging  chairs,  and  a  workshop.  An  elevator  machin¬ 
ery  room  was  also  on  this  floor. 

Architecturally,  the  Fort  Clayton  hospital  is  an  excellent  example  of  a  building 
designed  for  the  tropical  climate  and  was  unique  among  military  hospitals,  except 
perhaps  for  its  companion  hospital  constructed  under  the  same  program  at  Fort 
Gulick.  However,  a  few  modifications  of  standard  tropical  style  turned  out  to  be  nec¬ 
essary  due  to  the  building’s  utilization  and  size.  In  order  to  prevent  rain  from  enter¬ 
ing  the  porches  and  screened  windows,  a  7  ft  wide  mediagua  extended  from  the 
perimeter  of  the  building  on  each  floor.  The  mediaguas  were  not  originally 
designed  to  keep  the  porches  entirely  dry  during  driving  rains  since  these  spaces 
were  intended  mainly  for  occasional  use  by  patients  when  weather  permitted.  But 
because  the  porches  sometimes  had  to  be  used  as  ward  space  during  emergencies, 
they  had  to  be  retrofitted  to  keep  the  rain  entirely  out  throughout  the  year.  To 
accomplish  this,  jalousie  windows  were  installed.  Also,  because  the  porches  were 
deep  enough  to  eliminate  most  natural  light  from  the  wards,  artificial  lighting  was 
required  throughout  the  building.  Ridge  ventilation  was  used  to  help  cool  the  hospi¬ 
tal  since  the  building  was  too  large  to  rely  completely  on  cross-ventilation  through 
the  screened  windows. 

By  April  1943,  as  the  threat  to  the  canal  was  diminishing,  defense  alert  status  was 
downgraded  and  a  reduction  in  troop  strength  had  already  begun.  The  Sector  Hos¬ 
pital  hit  its  peak  size  in  1944,  but  within  2  years  demobilization  had  reduced  hospi¬ 
tal  capacity  to  25  beds. 

The  facility  was  inactivated  as  a  hospital  on  15  August 
1954  and  redesignated  as  the  Fort  Clayton  Dispensary.  Over 
the  ensuing  years,  much  of  the  building's  space  was  reused 
for  administrative  and  residential  purposes.45 

In  February  1957  the  hospital  underwent  another  change 
in  designation  and  became  the  Pacific  Area  Administrative 
Center.  A  100-man  BOQ  for  visiting  Latin  American  military 
officers  was  located  on  the  fourth  floor.  Major  window 


5-23 


alterations  were  made  in  May  1958/  when  the  louvered  win¬ 
dows  were  replaced.  In  April  1964  the  west  wing  of  the  third 
floor  was  modified  and  reutilized  as  a  BOQ  for  up  to  32  men. 


In  January  1970  the  exterior  porch  windows  on  the  ground 
floor  were  replaced  with  fixed  glass  aluminum  frame  windows 
to  accommodate  air  conditioning  of  the  building.  By  May 
1972/  Building  519  was  the  centralized  in-processing 
center  for  Army  personnel  assigned  to  the  area.  The 
helipad  was  in  place  by  May  1973,  and,  at  the  same  time/ 
windows  were  again  replaced.  In  July  1981,  the  roofing 
tiles  from  the  mediaguas  were  removed,  cleaned,  and 
reinstalled  after  deteriorated  lumber  had  been  replaced. 

In  May  1984,  fifth  floor  windows  were  replaced  with  awning 
window  types,  requiring  concrete  infill  at  the  tops  of 
original  window  openings.  In  February  1990,  the  same  was 
done  to  the  fourth  floor  windows.  In  April  1987,  the  air 
conditioning  system  was  repaired  and  extended.  In  April 
1996,  horizontal,  sliding  windows  replaced  third  floor  win¬ 
dows.  As  of  June  1997,  the  total  value  of  the  building, 
excluding  land,  was  assessed  at  $6,287,174.04. 

Several  other  buildings  were  constructed  at  the  same  time  to  support  hospital  opera¬ 
tions  and  mission.  A  single-pump  water  pump  house  (Building  521)  measuring  9  x  13 
ft  was  completed  in  November  1943.  The  structure  had  concrete  block  walls  and  a 
reinforced  concrete  roof  with  a  concrete  floor  supported  by  a  concrete  foundation. 


In  June  1965  the  pumps  were  removed  from  Building  521  and 
it  was  redesignated  as  a  paint  storage  building. 


Other  buildings  constructed  in  association  with  the  hospital  included  a  dormitory 
for  nurses,  a  barracks  building  for  enlisted  soldiers,  NCO  quarters,  and  officers’ 
quarters  for  ranking  hospital  personnel. 

Together,  these  facilities  and  other  functional 
buildings  comprised  a  discrete  medical  com¬ 
plex  on  the  grounds  of  Fort  Clayton  [5.24]. 


[5.24]  Fort  Clayton  medical  complex,  including 
nurses’  dormitory,  male  staff  barracks,  and 
ranking  officer’s  quarters  (c.  1943). 


Building 518,  Nurses’ Quarters 

In  January  1942  the  first  Army  nurses  were 
assigned  to  duty  in  the  Canal  Zone.  The  first 
two  units  to  arrive  on  the  isthmus  were  the 
210th  General  Hospital,  which  was  assigned 
to  Fort  Gulick,  and  the  218th  General  Hospi¬ 
tal,  which  was  assigned  to  Fort  Clayton.  The 
218th,  which  numbered  89  nurses,  had  been 
activated  at  Fort  Belvoir,  Virginia,  on  5  June 
1941.  The  nurses  were  temporarily  assigned 


5-24 


to  duty  at  installation  dispensaries  on  the  Pacific  side  of  the  isthmus  until  the  Sector 
Hospital  and  nurses’  quarters  were  completed  in  1943. 

The  218th  General  Hospital  was  inactivated  on  1  April  1943  and  its  personnel  reas¬ 
signed  to  the  333rd  Station  Hospital  at  Fort  Amador.  On  6  September  1943  this  unit 
transferred  to  Fort  Clayton  to  staff  the  new  hospital.  On  1  April  1944  the  333rd  Station 
Hospital  was  again  redesignated  as  the  262nd  General  Hospital;  staffing  comprised 
40  officers,  1  warrant  officer,  63  nurses,  2  dieticians,  2  physiotherapy  aides,  and  353 
enlisted  men. 

Building  518,  the  Fort  Clayton  Nurses’  Quarters,  was  completed  in  July  1943,  at  a 
cost  of  about  $236,000.  With  a  capacity  of  40  single  rooms,  the  building  contained 
27,787  sq  ft  of  usable  space.  The  basement  of  the  building  included  garage  space, 
three  servants’  bedrooms  and  bathrooms,  a  trunk  room,  kitchen  stores  room,  and 
washroom.  The  ground  floor  included  18  bedrooms  with  connecting  bathrooms.  A 
single  bedroom  with  private  bathroom  and  living  room;  an  office,  two  reception 
rooms,  and  a  dining  room  with  adjoining  kitchen.  The  second  floor  of  Building  518 
contained  20  bedrooms  with  connecting  bathrooms,  a  large  communal  living  room, 
and  a  sewing  room.  All  bedrooms  opened  onto  a  screened  porch. 


In  October  1951,  streetlights  were  installed  on  Hospital 
Road  between  the  nurses'  quarters  and  Building  519.  In 
August  1968  the  building  was  converted  to  a  guest  house,  and 
the  canopy  was  moved  to  the  Fort  Gulick  Guest  House  in  April 
1990.  The  canopy  was  replaced  with  a  permanent  tile-covered 
awning  supported  by  a  colonnade  of  square  brick  columns .  In 
June  1991  two  modern  bohios  were  built  on  the  site.  Designed 
to  resemble  the  traditional  thatched  hut  popular  in  Panama, 
these  bohio  structures  were 


[5.25]  Enlisted  men's  barracks  under  construc¬ 
tion  near  hospital  (c.  1941-1942). 


updated  with  concrete  floors, 
metal  tube  columns  covered  with 
clay  brick,  and  tile  roofs. 

Building520,  Enlisted  Men’s  Barracks 

In  June  1942  a  standard  200-man  barracks 
(Building  520)  was  completed  to  house  all 
male  military  staff  working  in  the  hospital.  Like 
other  standard  barracks,  Building  520  was  con¬ 
structed  of  concrete  frame,  concrete  block 
walls  covered  with  stucco,  red  Spanish  tile 
roofing,  and  continuous  mediaguas  [5.25].  The 
original  cost  of  the  barracks  was  $102,000. 

The  ground  floor  of  Building  52  0 


was  enclosed  in  1954  and  the 
building  was  converted  to  a  60- 
man  BEQ  (Senior  Bachelor  NCO 


5-25 


Quarters)  in  1963.  The  second  and  third  floor  spaces  were 
converted  from  squad  rooms  to  cubicle  rooms.  In  response 
to  increased  manpower  demands  during  the  late  1960s,  the 
first  floor  was  partially  converted  to  cubicles  in  1968.  The 
dining  facilities  received  an  upgrade  in  1972;  an  electri¬ 
cal  upgrade  was  completed  in  1974,  and  a  mailroom  was 
constructed  a  year  later.  The  mechanical  systems  were 
upgraded  in  1977,  and  the  second  and  third  floors  were 
altered  in  1978.  A  general  renovation  occurred  in  1987 
with  new  air  conditioning  units  being  installed  on  the 
first  floor.  The  dining  room  received  central  air  condition¬ 
ing  service  and  the  windows  were  replaced  with  aluminum 
sash;  as  in  many  other  cases  a  portion  of  the  window 
openings  had  to  be  filled  in  to  accommodate  the  smaller  mod¬ 
ern  windows.  By  the  late  1980s  the  first  floor  no  longer  con¬ 
tained  sleeping  accommodations  and  had  reverted  to 
shared-living  facilities.  The  third  floor  housed  both  men 
and  women.  Aluminum  sliding  windows  were  installed  in  the 
remainder  of  the  top  three  floors  in  1992.  Window  air  condi¬ 
tioning  units  were  still  being  installed  on  the  ground 
floor  in  1994.  The  building  later  became  home  to 
replacement  detachments.  A  bohio  was  constructed  for  the 
facility  in  1983. 

Hospital  Officers' Housing 

Quarters  were  also  provided  for  officer-grade  hospital  personnel  in  a  group  to  the 
west  of  Building  518.  This  group  contained  NCO  (Buildings  501-515),  company  offi¬ 
cer  (Buildings  506-511,  515),  and  field  officer  housing  (Buildings  512-514,  516-517). 
The  buildings  were  all  two-story  tropical  style  structures  designed  along  the  same 
lines  as  the  others  built  during  this  period.  The  NCO  and  company  officers’  quarters 
each  held  two  families,  with  two  and  three  bedrooms,  respectively.  The  exception 
to  this  plan  was  Building  515,  the  only  single  family  (three  bedroom)  company  offi¬ 
cer’s  quarters  built  on  post  during  this  period.  It  measured  26  x  35.5  ft.  The  field  offi¬ 
cers’  quarters  were  all  single-family,  four-bedroom  units. 

Nearly  all  of  this  officers'  housing  had  aluminum 
horizontal  sliding  and/or  awning  windows  installed  in  the 
early  1970s.  The  quarters  had  their  interior  and  exterior 
doors  replaced  in  1979,  and  central  air  conditioning  was 
installed  in  1987  -  1988.  Buildings  501-511  had  their  win¬ 
dows  replaced  with  double-hung  aluminum  sash  windows  in 
1990. 

Other  Hospital-Related  Construction 

Completed  in  July  1943,  a  garage  for  12  cars  was  constructed  using  the  same  build¬ 
ing  materials  as  the  hospital— concrete  and  clay  roofing  tile. 


5-26 


Building  519-A  was  modified  in  1952,  involving  chiefly  a 
change  in  roofing  material.  The  building  was  renumbered 
Building  525.  In  June  1969  an  earth  and  rock  heliport,  des¬ 
ignated  Facility  522,  was  constructed  on  the  hospital 
grounds  near  the  emergency  room  entrance.  Facility  522  was 
subsequently  paved  with  asphalt  and  used  as  a  parking  lot 
when  Building  519  became  the  administrative  center  for 
USARSO . 

A  Brief  History  of  Operation  Transit 

The  Panama  Canal  stayed  open  and  operational  during  World  War  II,  and  transit  by 
U.S.  ships  was  routine  and  uneventful.  As  a  ship  made  its  way  from  one  ocean  to  the 
other  the  troops  aboard  were  often  allowed  to  disembark  for  rest  and  relaxation.  In 
April  1944  the  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff  to  the  Caribbean  Defense  Command  was 
authorized  to  offer  these  soldiers  quarters,  transportation,  and  rations.  Individual 
post  commanders  offered  access  to  the  local  PX,  medical  care,  and  entertainment. 
Following  the  defeat  and  surrender  of  Germany  on  10  May  1945  more  than  125,000 
troops  were  transported  through  the  Panama  Canal  from  Europe  to  the  Pacific  The¬ 
ater;  to  handle  this  traffic  the  command  formally  established  Operation  Transit  on  5 
July  1945. 

Under  Operation  Transit  there  were  four  basic  scenarios  for  servicing  ships  and 
accommodating  troops.  Plan  A  was  for  ships  that  were  docked  for  a  short  period  of 
time  at  either  Pier  18  in  Balboa  or  Piers  6  or  9  in  Cristobal.  In  these  cases  there  was 
not  enough  time  for  troops  to  leave  their  ship,  and  little  time  for  their  hosts  to  do 
more  than  put  magazines  and  recreational  equipment  aboard,  and  to  deliver  films 
for  later  viewing  by  the  troops.  If  time  allowed,  a  military  band  would  set  up  on  the 
pier  and  entertain  the  troops. 

Plan  B  was  for  troops  who  stayed  aboard  their  vessel  to  eat  and  sleep,  but  were  able 
to  debark  to  the  pier  area  for  a  few  hours  of  recreation.  Plan  C  was  established  for 
similar  situations  but  included  provisions  to  shuttle  troops  to  a  prearranged  recre¬ 
ation  area,  such  as  the  Balboa  High  School  stadium,  for  exercise.  Under  Plan  B 
mobile  PX  facilities  were  parked  at  the  pier,  and  soldiers  were  able  to  buy  candy, 
soft  drinks,  ice  cream,  toiletries,  and  souvenirs;  they  could  also  participate  in  recre¬ 
ational  activities  at  the  pier.  Under  Plan  C  soldiers  were  able  to  get  in  a  game  of 
baseball  during  their  limited  shore  leave. 

Plan  D  was  the  most  expansive  scenario,  and  involved  billeting  visiting  troops  on 
post.  On  the  Pacific  side  of  the  isthmus,  the  closest  installation  to  the  Balboa  pier 
was  Albrook  Field,  and  it  was  there  that  troops  were  routinely  taken  for  billeting.  As  a 
vessel  entered  the  first  set  of  locks  at  Gatun  on  the  Atlantic  side,  a  representative  of 
the  Caribbean  Defense  Command  boarded  the  ship  for  the  duration  of  the  transit  to 
Balboa.  After  briefing  the  Commanding  Officer  of  Troops  the  agent  went  on  to  brief 
and  organize  the  troops  and  to  make  on-ship  arrangements.  He  then  disembarked  at 
Pedro  Miguel  and  was  driven  to  meet  the  transport  at  Balboa.  As  soon  as  the  gang¬ 
planks  were  in  place  the  soldiers  came  ashore,  formed  into  their  preassigned 


5-27 


groups,  and  transported  to  their  destination.  The  logistics  were  very  efficient,  and 
thousands  of  troops  could  be  processed  in  a  short  time.46 

A  transit  of  the  vessel  USS  General  D.  E.  Aultman  turned  out  to  be  unique  for  its 
passengers,  but  at  the  same  time  was  virtually  routine  for  the  managers  of  Opera¬ 
tion  Transit.  On  its  way  home  from  the  Pacific  Theater  with  its  tired  troops,  the  Ault¬ 
man  entered  Cristobal  Harbor  at  about  1350  hours  on  7  August  1945  and  began  its 
transit  through  the  canal.  The  transit  went  well  until  about  a  mile  south  of  the 
Miraflores  Locks,  where  the  ship  ran  aground.  While  repairs  were  made  to  the 
‘marooned’  ship  the  lucky  troops  aboard  prepared  to  disembark  and  spend  a  few 
days  as  guests  of  the  command.  Because  two  other  vessels  were  due  to  arrive  with 
troops  who  were  already  ‘booked’  into  Albrook  Field  and  at  Fort  Amador,  the  sol¬ 
diers  from  the  Aultman  were  transported  to  two  other  Pacific-side  installations: 
Fort  Kobbe  hosted  1782  officers  and  enlisted  men  while  Fort  Clayton  provided  hos¬ 
pitality  to  the  remaining  84  nurses,  5  Red  Cross  women,  and  1427  officers  and 
enlisted  men.47 


“We  have  been  enjoying  an 
unscheduled  but  most  wel¬ 
come  shore  leave  all  this 
week  in  what  to  us  is  para¬ 
dise.  Beautiful  posts  that 
make  the  finest  country 
clubs  at  home  look  cheap, 
have  been  our  hosts  and 
they  have  wined  and  dined, 
and  waited  on  us  hand  and 
foot.” 


At  1105  hours  on  8  August  the  troops  arrived  at  Fort  Clayton  and  were  taken  to  the 
canteen  service,  where  the  Red  Cross  was  set  up  to  serve  1500  doughnuts  and  150 
gallons  of  punch.  They  were  also  able  to  take  advantage  of  reading  material,  private 
desks  for  writing  letters  home,  and  health  consultations  provided  by  the  Red  Cross. 
At  the  Fort  Clayton  PX  the  visitors  spent  nearly  $7000  on  432  bottles  of  Coca  Cola, 
180  gallons  of  bulk  ice  cream,  and  35  kegs  of  beer.  In  order  to  ensure  that  plenty  of 
merchandise  was  available  for  troops  making  the  transit,  the  Commanding  General 
had  allotted  $10,000  to  the  Department  Exchange  Officer.  The  most  popular  items 
sold  at  the  PX  were  candy  and  soft  drinks.  Many  of  the  soldiers  purchased  sou¬ 
venirs  and  gifts,  which  were  wrapped  and  mailed  free  of  charge. 


During  their  first  day  at  Fort  Clayton  the  visiting 
troops  were  given  access  to  post  athletic  facilities, 
and  in  the  evening  about  800-900  persons 
attended  a  USO  show  at  Theater  #2.  After  the 
show  a  basketball  game  was  organized  at  the  post 
gymnasium.  The  responsibility  of  arranging  USO 
shows,  orientation  courses,  and  radio  programs 
fell  to  the  PCD  Special  Service  Office.  This  office 
also  coordinated  with  the  Red  Cross  and  other 
volunteer  organizations  to  organize  athletic  and 
recreational  activities,  and  even  to  provide  dance 
partners  for  the  troops  [5.26]. 


Unidentified  soldier  involved 
in  Operation  Transit48 


[5.26]  Special  Services  personnel  perform 
many  duties  in  Athletic,  Recreational  and 
Welfare  Activities  which  include  the  operation  of 
public  address  systems  in  parades,  ceremonies, 
and  athletic  events. 


Red  Cross  services  were  open  early  the  next  day 
and  the  PX  continued  its  land-office  business  sell¬ 
ing  15  cases  of  Coca  Cola,  10  cases  of  other  soft 
drinks,  18  cases  of  Panamanian  beer,  and  60 
cases  of  U.S.  beer  between  0900  and  2300  hours. 
During  the  early  hours  of  10  August  passes  were 


5-28 


issued,  after  which  the  soldiers  participated  in  a  march.  Those  who  received 
passes— some  five  busloads— took  a  sightseeing  tour  of  some  of  the  country’s  his¬ 
toric  sites.  That  evening  a  dance  was  held  at  the  gymnasium  with  Red  Cross  volun¬ 
teers  attending  as  dance  partners.  The  highlight  of  the  following  day  was  a  baseball 
game  between  a  Fort  Clayton  team  and  a  “crack  Negro  outfit”  from  the  Aultman.49 
The  final  score  was  Visitors  4,  Fort  Clayton  2.  The  troops,  on  their  way  home  from 
battle  in  the  Pacific,  returned  to  their  vessel,  and  at  1130  hours  on  13  August  the  USS 
General  D.  £.  Aultman  put  out  to  sea. 

The  PCD  Surgeon’s  Office  played  an  important  role  in  Operation  Transit.  It  was  the 
responsibility  of  this  office  to  remove  injured  or  ill  patients  from  the  troop  ships  for 
care  at  the  Fort  Gulick  (on  the  Atlantic  side)  or  Fort  Clayton  hospitals.  When 
surgery  or  extended  treatment  was  required  the  injured  personnel  would  some¬ 
times  remain  at  the  post  hospital  after  their  ship  left  the  Canal  Zone.  During  Opera¬ 
tion  Transit  several  hundred  patients  were  admitted  to  the  Fort  Clayton  and  Gulick 
hospitals. 

On  12  September  1945  Lieutenant  General  George  H.  Brett,  Commanding  General, 
officially  ended  Operation  Transit.  During  the  operation,  which  lasted  only  a  few 
months,  ships  took  on  410,000  barrels  of  fuel  oil  and,  thanks  to  the  Red  Cross, 
124,725  complimentary  pints  of  ice  cream.  Soldiers  received  335,000  lb  of  mail  and 
used  150,000  pieces  of  stationary  to  send  greetings  back  home  from  the  Panama 
Canal.  Operation  Transit  clearly  did  the  job  making  the  experience  pleasant  for  the 
troops  just  as  canal  defense  forces  made  the  transit  secure  for  the  ships.  As  one 
soldier  effused,  while  passing  through  during  Operation  Transit  “[T]he  whole 
setup  from  General  down  to  private  fell  over  themselves  to  entertain  and  make  us 
comfortable.”50 


“The  men  [at  Albrook  Field]  had  settled  into  their  quarters  and 
were  drifting  back  to  the  recreation  area.  Somewhere  a 
newscaster  was  intoning  the  same  reports  heard  for  days. 

Swiss,  Japanese,  and  American  officials  were  hurrying  about; 
messages  were  being  decoded,  encoded;  there  was  nothing  def¬ 
inite  yet— suddenly  a  pause— the  announcer’s  voice,  atremble 
with  excitement,  broke  and  then  blurted  out,  ‘Japan  has  surren¬ 
dered!’  Air  raid  sirens,  whistles  from  ships  in  the  harbor,  from 
trains  and  repair  yards,  horns  from  passing  automobiles,  raised 
an  almost  solid  wall  of  ecstatic  sound.” 

S.D.  Berardinelli51 


5-29 


Notes  for  Chapter  5 

1  “Remember  Pearl  Harbor?”  Panama  Canal 
Review,  7  December  1951,  2. 

2  Historical  Section,  The  Caribbean  Defense 
Command,  Vol.  II,  403-404. 

3  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  US.  Army  Installations 
in  Panama,  129. 

4  “Fiftieth  Anniversary  Supplement,”  Panama 
Canal  Review,  4  May  1954, 13;  Conn,  Engel- 
man,  and  Fairchild,  Guarding  the  United 
States  and  Its  Outposts,  424, 434,  437. 

5  Historical  Section,  The  Caribbean  Defense 
Command,  Vol.  II,  408-409. 

6  Robert  S.  Wilson,  letter  to  author,  8  Decem¬ 
ber  1999. 

7  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  US.  Army  Installations 
in  Panama,  129. 

8  “Ten  Years  Ago  in  March,"  Panama  Canal 
Review,  4  April  1951,  6. 

9  Robert  H.  Tippett,  “My  Comments  and  Recol¬ 
lections  on  Ft.  Clayton,”  unpublished  manu¬ 
script,  7  February  2000, 2. 

10  Tippett,  “My  Comments  and  Recollections 
on  Ft.  Clayton,”  2. 

1 1  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD , 
Vol.  3, 192-193. 

12  Tippett,  “My  Comments  and  Recollections 
on  Ft.  Clayton,”  2. 

13  Historical  Section,  The  Caribbean  Defense 
Command,  Vol.  II,  473. 

14  Robert  L.  Overkott,  “Memories  of  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton,  Panama  Canal  Zone,”  unpublished  docu¬ 
ment,  March  2000. 

15  “Ten  Years  Ago  In  January,”  Panama  Canal 
Review,  1  February  1952, 11;  “Ten  Years  Ago 
in  July,”  Panama  Canal  Review,  1  August 
1952,  3. 

16  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD, 
Vol.  4,  The  Reconversion  Period  1945-1947, 
(1949),  viii-xi;  Historical  Section,  The 
Caribbean  Defense  Command,  Vol.  II,  626; 
Tippett,  “My  Comments  and  Recollections 
on  Ft.  Clayton,”  2;  “Ten  Years  Ago  in  April,” 
Panama  Canal  Review,  1  May  1953, 13. 

17  AG  Historical  Branch,  Military  Personnel, 
138-139. 

18  “Completion  Report  on  the  Construction  and 
Completion  of  Headquarters  Building  at  Fort 
Clayton,  Canal  Zone”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ: 


Corps  of  Engineers,  Isthmian  District, 
Caribbean  Defense  Command,  9  October 
1942),  85-88,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the 
Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (3), 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD. 

19  “Completion  Report  on  the  Construction  and 
Completion  of  Ordnance  Storehouse  at  Fort 
Clayton,  Canal  Zone”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ: 
Corps  of  Engineers,  Isthmian  District, 
Caribbean  Defense  Command,  9  October 
1942),  41,  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the 
Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (3), 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD. 

20  “Army  Tropic  Testing  in  Panama,” 
unpublished  manuscript  (Corozal,  Panama: 
Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing, 
United  States  Army  Garrison-Panama,  1995), 
1-7. 

21  Rose  C.  Engelman,  ed.  A  Decade  of  Progress: 
The  United  States  Army  Medical  Department, 
1959-1969  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1971), 

7-8. 

22  Thomas  P.  Jenkin,  Ober  D.  Purvis,  and 
Joseph  W.  Crim,  A  History  of  Medical  Depart¬ 
ment  Activities  in  the  Caribbean  Defense 
Command  in  World  War  II  (Quarry  Heights, 
CZ:  Caribbean  Defense  Command,  1946), 
USARSO  History  Office  files,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 

College  Park,  MD,  15. 

23  Historical  Section,  Panama  Canal 
Department,  Medical  Corps,  Annex  3,  6. 

24  Historical  Section,  Panama  Canal 
Department,  Medical  Corps,  Vol.  I,  Ch.  I, 
USARSO  History  Office  files,  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration, 

College  Park,  MD,  21-22. 

25  Ibid.,  23. 

26  Ibid.,  22-23. 

27  Ibid.,  Ch.  VI,  3. 

28  Ibid.,  18-f. 

29  The  Historical  Unit,  United  States  Army  Med¬ 
ical  Department  Medical  Department,  United 
States  Army  in  World  War  II:  Preventive  Medi¬ 
cine  in  World  War  II,  Robert  S.  Anderson  and 
Ebbe  Curtis  Hoff,  Eds.,  Vol.  9,  Special  Fields 
(Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1969),  21-25. 

30  Jenkin,  Purvis,  and  Crim,  Medical 
Department  Activities,  380-381;  Engelman,  A 
Decade  of  Progress,  173-174, 177. 


31  Historical  Section,  Panama  Canal  Depart¬ 
ment,  Medical  Corps,  Vol.  I,  Ch.  1, 15-16, 
18-20,  Ch.  VI,  1 ;  Historical  Section,  The 
Caribbean  Defense  Command ,  Vol.  II, 
619-620. 

32  Historical  Section,  Panama  Canal  Depart¬ 
ment,  Medical  Corps,  Vol.  I,  Ch.  VI,  1-3; 
Jenkin,  Purvis,  and  Crim,  Medical  Department 
Activities,  16;  Historical  Unit,  AGO,  “A  History 
of  the  Construction,  Operation  and  Inactiva¬ 
tion  of  Fort  Clayton  Hospital”  (Fort  Amador, 
CZ:  USARCARIB,  1954),  USARSO  History 
Office  files,  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD,  49. 

33  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD, 
Vol.  1, 16-17. 

34  Historical  Unit,  AGO,  “A  History  of  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton  Hospital,"  i. 

35  Ibid.,  11. 

36  Ibid.,  20. 

37  Ibid.,  22-25,  28. 

38  Ibid.,  29-32. 

39  Ibid.,  29-32. 

40  Ibid.,  11-34. 

41  Jenkin,  Purvis,  and  Crim,  Medical 
Department  Activities,  369-370. 

42  Richard  Guy  Wilson,  “Imperial  American 
Identity  at  the  Panama  Canal,”  Modulus, 
1981/82: 27. 

43  Small,  interview,  21  February  1995. 

44  Historical  Unit,  AGO,  “A  History  of  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton  Hospital,”  44-45. 

45  White,  “Ft.  Clayton— A  History,”  20;  Dolores 
De  Mena,  “Clayton  Hospital  Advanced  Medi¬ 
cine,”  Tropic  Times,  14  January  1994,  9;  “Clay¬ 
ton  Hospital  Closes  Sunday,”  Buccaneer,  13 
August  1954,  1. 

46  Operation  Transit  in  the  Panama  Canal 
Department  (Canal  Zone:  Department  Engi¬ 
neer  Reproduction  Plant,  n.d.),  17. 

47  Ibid.,  163-166. 

48  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD, 

Vol.  3,  286-292. 

49  Ibid. 

50  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD, 

Vol.  3, 286-292. 

51  S.  D.  Berardinelli,  Operation  Transit  in  the 
Panama  Canal  Zone,  18  December  1947, 184. 


5-30 


CHAPTER  6 


The  Cold  War  Era  and  New  Missions  (1946-1978) 

The  Changing  Face  of  the  Postwar  World 

The  end  of  World  War  II  brought  about  a  new  geopolitical  reality  into  which  mili¬ 
tary-industrial  superpowers  emerged  with  weapons  powerful  enough  to  strike  every 
corner  of  the  globe.  For  U.S.  military  forces  this  meant  constant  improvements  in 
weapons,  training,  and  readiness  [6.01].  Alliances  spanning  oceans  and  hemi¬ 
spheres  created  a  precarious  and  subtly  shifting  balance  of  power  as  east  and  west 
sought  dominance  both  militarily  and  politically.  Defense  strategy  became  increas¬ 
ingly  hemispheric  in  character,  and  the  nations  of  Central  and  South  America  were 
actively  courted  to  play  supporting  roles  in  the  global  U.S.  defense  strategy  [6.02]. 

The  everyday  aspects  of  life  after  the  war  were  changing  dramatically,  too.  Postwar 
prosperity  spurred  the  advance  and  commercialization  of  formerly  exotic  technolo¬ 
gies  that  would  become  standard  equipment  in  the  lives  of  America’s  middle  class. 

The  demand  for  modern  household  comforts  and  conveniences  was  sharply  on  the 
rise  beginning  in  the  late  1940s— for  civilians  and  soldiers  alike.  Three  consumer 
technologies  that  made  their  mark  on  Canal  Zone  infrastructure  (as  they  did  back 
home)  were  air  conditioning,  television,  and  the  proliferation  of  automobiles.  Post¬ 
war  construction  programs  on  Army  installations,  including  Fort  Clayton,  put  a 
growing  emphasis  on  modern,  quality  housing  because  of  the  need  to  recruit  and 
retain  motivated  career  soldiers.  A  growing  number  of  soldiers  were  getting  married 
and  starting  families  on  military  installations,  and  the  efforts  to  accommodate  family 
life  on  base  had  a  substantial  impact  on  the  development  of  Fort  Clayton  after  World 
War  II. 


[6.01]  A  member  of  the  242nd  Chemical  Supply  Detachment  demonstrates  an  M-l  smoke  pot 
to  personnel  participating  in  Operation  Jackpot  II  at  Fort  Clayton,  August  1953. 


6-1 


Continued  Postwar  Drawdown 

The  reduction  in  strength  and  redeployment  of  troops  from  the  Panama  Canal 
Department  and  the  Caribbean  Defense  Command  that  began  in  spring  1943 
increased  in  pace  until  prewar  strength  was  reached  in  December  1945.  The  first 
month  of  1946  brought  the  beginnings  of  troop  reorganization,  the  goal  of  which 
was  to  reach  a  1  March  target  of  20,000  Canal  Zone  troops.1  The  speed  with  which 
troops  were  transferred  out  of  the  Canal  Zone  left  quite  a  bit  of  confusion  as  to 
actual  numbers.  This  census  problem  was  not  confined  to  Panama,  however,  and 
was  widespread  throughout  the  entire  military. 

Personnel  counts  continued  to  decline  for  about  15  years  after  World  War  II.  Total 
military  census  in  Panama  reached  its  lowest  ebb  in  1959,  at  6600  troops.  This  num¬ 
ber  gradually  increased  to  about  10,000  by  the  mid-1970s  and  would  remain  fairly 
constant  into  the  1990s,  when  the  final  major  troop  reductions  began  in  preparation 
for  a  total  U.S.  military  withdrawal  from  Panama  by  no  later  than  31  December  1999.3 

Command  Reorganizations  Through  the  Cold  War 

Consolidation  Under  USARCARIB 

As  part  of  the  postwar  drawdown  process,  the  Coast  Artillery  Command  and  the 
Mobile  Force  were  discontinued,  and  on  1  December  1946  the  Panama  Canal 
Department  was  again  divided  into  Atlantic  and  Pacific  sectors.  By  this  time  the 
Sixth  Air  Force  had  been  relieved  from  the  PCD  and  established  as  the  Caribbean 
Air  Command.  More  sweeping  changes  occurred  in  1947  when  the  Air  Force 
became  a  separate  branch  of  the  armed  forces  under  the  Department  of  Defense. 
Also  that  year,  the  Army,  Navy,  and  Air  Force  components  in  Panama  were  reorga¬ 
nized  under  the  Caribbean  Command.  As  part  of  this  reorganization,  on  15  Novem¬ 
ber  1947  the  Panama  Canal  Department  was  inactivated  and  replaced  with  the  U.S. 
Army  Caribbean  (USARCARIB).  Headquarters  for  USARCARIB  were  relocated  from 
Quarry  Heights  to  Fort  Amador  2  years  later.  The  decision  to  retain  a  unified  com¬ 
mand  over  Canal  Zone  forces  reflected  the  continuing  need  for  an  integrated 
defense  that  could  effectively  utilize  all  available  defensive  measures  in  any  emer¬ 
gency.  In  the  years  immediately  following  the  war  the  United  States  made  efforts  to 
keep  defense  sites  in  Panama  that  had  been  established  outside  of  the  Canal  Zone. 
Negotiations  toward  this  end  proved  fruitless,  however,  and  on  22  December  1947 
the  Panamanian  National  Assembly  voted  down  a  proposed  defense  base  treaty.4 

Defense  of  the  Panama  Canal  remained  a  primary  mission  for  USARCARIB,  but  it  was 
joined  by  a  new  priority  implementing  the  policies  and  international  agreements 
pertaining  to  military  assistance  groups  in  Latin  America.  Additional  requirements 
included  the  operation  of  a  school  to  train  selected  Latin  American  Army  officers 
and  enlisted  men  and  support  of  the  U.S.  Army  Inter-American  Geodetic  Survey.5 

The  idea  of  the  school  for  Latin  American  military  officers  developed  during  World 
War  II  and  matured  in  the  years  that  followed.  Officers  and  enlisted  men  of  various 
Latin  American  nationalities  came  to  Panama  for  field  training  with  U.S.  field  units 


"The  Army  was  fast  demobi¬ 
lizing  and  with  the  departing 
hordes  of  soldiers  went 
most  of  the  clerical  talent. 
The  Army  was  [in  such 
chaos],  administratively, 
and  the  demobilization 
going  so  fast  that  it  became 
necessary  to  have  an  army¬ 
wide  100  percent  muster. 

On  a  given  day  in  1946, 
every  person  in  uniform  was 
in  formation  and  answered 
to  his  name  being  called, 
and  records  of  the  muster 
were  forwarded  to  the  Adju¬ 
tant  General  in  the 
Pentagon,  Washington,  DC, 
to  get  the  strength  of  the 
Army  straightened  out.” 

Martin  A.  Peters2 


6-2 


stationed  at  Fort  Clayton.  This  initiative  would  eventually  become  the  mission  of  the 
U.S.  Army  School  of  the  Americas  at  Fort  Gulick.6 

The  Army’s  Southern  Command 

A  1963  reorganization  redesignated  the  Caribbean  Command  as  the  United  States 
Southern  Command  (USSOUTHCOM),  and  this  became  the  forces-wide  command 
for  the  area.  USARCAR1B  became  the  United  States  Army  Forces  Southern  Com¬ 
mand  (USARSOUTHCOM,  later  shortened  to  USARSO).  These  actions  changed 
organizations,  but  the  overall  missions  and  responsibilities  remained  the  same.  The 
Army  command  structure  changed  again  in  1974,  possibly  due  to  the  end  of  the 
Vietnam  conflict  and  the  subsequent  reduction  in  Canal  Zone  jungle  training.  In  any 
case,  USARSOUTHCOM  was  relieved  as  a  major  Army  command  and  assigned  to 
Fort  McPherson,  Georgia,  as  a  subordinate  command  of  the  United  States  Army 
Forces  Command  (FORSCOM)  on  1  July  1974.  The  Army  component  of  SOUTHCOM 
was  assumed  by  the  193rd  Infantry  Brigade  on  31  October  1974,  which  was  redesig¬ 
nated  the  193rd  Infantry  Brigade  (Canal  Zone)  under  command  of  the  United  States 
Army  Forces  Command. 

The  unified  command,  USSOUTHCOM,  provided  operational  control  for  the  193rd 
Infantry,  which  was  headquartered  at  Fort  Amador.  This  brigade  had  been  activated 
in  1962,  at  that  time  comprising  the  4th  Battalion  (Mechanized),  20th  Infantry;  3rd  Bat¬ 
talion,  508th  Infantry  (Airborne)  at  Kobbe;  and  4th  Battalion,  10th  Infantry.  This  con¬ 
figuration  enabled  the  brigade  to  defend  the  canal  by  land,  sea,  and  air.  These 
elements  were  later  joined  by  the  1st  Battalion,  187th  Infantry,  and  5th  Battalion,  87th 
Infantry.  Around  this  time  the  secondary  missions  of  Central  and  South  American 
military  support— disaster  relief  and  drug  interdiction— began  to  gather  steam.  These 
missions  came  into  their  own  during  the  1980s  in  an  era  of  regional  ideological  fer¬ 
ment  and  the  rise  of  new  military  strongmen.7 

Fort  Clayton’s  Evolving  Mission 

As  always,  the  ground  forces  remained  tasked  with  the  close-in  defense  of  the  Panama 
Canal.  The  33rd  Infantry  was  reactivated  at  Fort  Clayton  on  1  February  1946  and  head¬ 
quartered  in  Building  129,  which  had  been  vacated  when  the  11th  Engineer  Regiment 
returned  to  the  United  States  in  1943.  On  1  August  1948  the  33rd  Infantry  moved  to  Fort 
Gulick,  where  it  was  inactivated  one  month  later.  The  unit  would  later  be  reactivated 
(4  January  1950)  at  Fort  Kobbe,  and  it  remained  there  until  26  May  1956.8 

The  assignment  and  attachment  of  units  to  Fort  Clayton  was  reorganized  in  1956 
under  General  Orders  15,  Headquarters,  U.S.  Army  Caribbean.  The  primary  units 
assigned  to  Fort  Clayton  were  Headquarters  and  Headquarters  Detachment,  65th 
Anti-Aircraft  Artillery  (AAA)  Group,  534th  Military  Police  Company,  and  the  79th 
Army  Band.  Also  located  at  Fort  Clayton  or  Corozal  were  the  Inter-American  Geo¬ 
detic  Survey,  Civilian  Personnel  Office,  Medical,  Signal,  Ordnance,  Chemical, 
Finance,  Engineer,  Transportation,  Quartermaster,  518th  Engineer  Company  (Com¬ 
bat),  and  the  17th  Ordnance  Company  (Direct  Support).  The  65th  AAA  Group  Com¬ 
manding  Officer  also  held  this  rank  for  Fort  Clayton  and  the  sub-posts  of  Corozal 


6-3 


and  Curundu.  Most  troops  of  the  AAA  Group  were  dispersed  to  anti-aircraft  artillery 
positions  in  the  surrounding  terrain.  The  518th  Engineer  Company  (Combat)  was 
the  only  other  combat  unit  stationed  at  Fort  Clayton.  It  provided  troop  support  to 
engineering  projects  across  the  isthmus.  The  remaining  units  provided  administra¬ 
tive  and  technical  services  for  USARCARIB  operations.  With  some  minor  rearrange¬ 
ment,  this  assignment  of  units  to  Fort  Clayton  remained  in  effect  until  the 
implementation  of  the  Panama  Canal  Treaties  in  1979.9 

Curundu  Realignments 

The  massive  amount  of  construction  at  Fort  Clayton  associated  with  World  War  II 
greatly  contributed  to  the  total  construction  investment  in  the  post,  which  was  esti¬ 
mated  at  more  than  $14.6  million  from  the  beginning  through  30  June  1946.  After 
World  War  II,  as  previously  discussed,  massive  military  demobilization  and  funding 
cuts  essentially  ended  new  construction  projects  at  Fort  Clayton  in  the  immediate 
postwar  years.  In  1950,  and  again  in  1956,  the  boundaries  of  the  Curundu  Military 
Reservation  were  readjusted,  with  five  parcels  allocated  to  Albrook  Air  Force  Base. 
The  remaining  property  was  designated  as  Fort  Clayton  and  included  the  Post  of 
Corozal  and  the  Curundu  Housing  Area. 

The  Curundu  Housing  Area  provided  housing  for  Department  of  the  Army  civilian 
employees  and  military  personnel.  The  “low-cost”  housing  area  had  been  con¬ 
structed  as  part  of  the  World  War  II  buildup,  and  had  its  own  amenities  such  as  a 
clubhouse  and  post  office. 

Corozal,  originally  turned  over  to  the  Army  by  the  Isthmian  Canal  Commission  in 
1911,  was  one  of  the  earliest  U.S.  military  posts  in  Panama.  The  installation  primarily 
served  the  Army  as  a  supply  depot  and  maintenance  center.  Corozal’s  later  activi¬ 
ties  included  elements  of  the  193rd  Infantry  Brigade  (Panama)  such  as  the  Direc¬ 
torate  of  Facilities  Engineering  and  the  G4  Directorate  of  Logistics.  Tenant  units  of 
the  193rd  Infantry  stationed  at  Corozal  included  the  U.S.  Army  Communications 
Command  Agency-Panama,  the  U.S.  Army  Tropic  Test  Center,  and  Troop  Support 
Agency.10 

Impact  of  Cold  War-Era  Military  Conflicts 

The  Korea  Action 

With  the  June  1950  North  Korean  invasion  of  South  Korea,  the  United  States  entered 
its  next  military  conflict.  The  Canal  Zone  did  not  escape  the  impact  of  this  involve¬ 
ment;  the  canal  was  instrumental  in  shipping  troops  and  materiel  to  the  fronts.  By 
order  of  the  Commanding  General,  USARCARIB  was  placed  on  modified  alert  status 
on  28  June  1950.  Security  at  military  installations  was  increased  and  Army  guards 
were  assigned  to  critical  canal  facilities.  Defensive  measures  were  soon  upgraded 
as  anti-aircraft  units  took  up  tactical  positions  to  defend  against  air  attack  and  to 
assist  in  harbor  defense.  Anti-aircraft  positions  protecting  the  locks  were  the  same 
ones  used  during  WWII.  Control  of  ships  in  and  out  of  the  Canal  Zone  tightened, 
hostile  foreign  nationals  were  arrested  and  detained,  and  anti-sabotage  measures 


6-4 


were  put  into  place  to  support  the  USARCARIB  defense  mission.  Military  lock 
guards  were  reinstated,  but  these  were  greatly  reduced  in  1952  when  the  Panama 
Canal  Company’s  own  Locks  Security  Force  was  activated.  Consequently  the 
Army’s  mission  in  this  area  was  revised  from  “internal  surveillance”  to  “perimeter 
surveillance”  of  the  locks.11 

Mobile  reserves  were  mustered  at  Forts  Gulick  and  Clayton.  At  Fort  Clayton  this 
reserve  consisted  of  4  officers  and  103  enlisted  men  from  B  Troop,  45th  Mechanized 
Cavalry.  The  duration  of  tours  of  duty  was  extended  for  all  military  personnel.  After 
the  Army  tasked  USARCARIB  with  maintaining  a  jungle  training  program  in  1951,  a 
permanent  home  for  this  training  was  located  on  the  Atlantic  side  at  Fort  Sherman. 
Program  graduates  were  relocated  to  Korea.  Civilians  in  the  Canal  Zone  took  Civil 
Defense  classes  such  as  first  aid  in  preparation  for  a  possible  attack. 

With  its  defenses  in  place  and  ready,  as  during  World  War  II,  the  Canal  Zone  ulti¬ 
mately  was  not  directly  involved  in  military  conflict  during  the  Korea  action.  After 
the  conflict,  a  reorganization  and  strength  realignment  occurred.12 

Vietnam  Conflict 

The  Vietnam  conflict  did  not  have  a  large  impact  on  Canal  Zone  military  installa¬ 
tions,  with  the  exception  of  Forts  Sherman  and  Gulick,  where  training  for  jungle 
operations  was  provided.  Training  facilities  at  Fort  Sherman  included  mockups  of 
Vietnamese  villages. 

The  Panama  Canal  did  not  serve  as  a  major  transshipment  point  for  troops  or  sup¬ 
plies  during  the  Vietnam  conflict,  and  no  alerts  were  issued  in  the  Canal  Zone  dur¬ 
ing  this  time.  Fort  Clayton  remained  the  major  Canal  Zone  Mechanized  Infantry 
post,  but  had  no  direct  participation  in  the  conflict.13 

One  notable  change  in  defense  tactics  was  initiated  during  the  Vietnam  era:  in  1960 
Hawk  missile  batteries  were  put  in  place  to  supplement  the  anti-aircraft  automatic 
weapons  at  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  entrances  to  the  canal.  The  Hawk  was  a 
medium-range  anti-aircraft  missile  that  provided  air  defense  coverage  against  low- 
to-medium  altitude  aircraft.  The  Hawk  system  was  mobile,  mounted  either  on  a 
towed  trailer  or  a  tracked  vehicle.  The  mobile  nature  of  the  system  provided  a  dis¬ 
tinct  advantage  in  potentially  “hot”  areas.  Two  Hawk  battalions  were  deployed  to 
Florida  in  1962  during  the  Cuban  missile  crisis,  and  during  the  mid-1960s  Hawk 
units  were  deployed  to  Vietnam  to  protect  air  bases  and  port  facilities.  The  Hawk 
batteries  installed  at  each  end  of  the  Panama  Canal  were  removed  at  the  end  of 
1968. 14 

The  Panamanian  Sovereignty  Movement 

Rising  Postwar  Nationalism 

During  the  20  years  following  World  War  II  a  tide  of  nationalism  rose  in  Panama  and 
the  pro-sovereignty  opinion  grew  more  and  more  inflamed.  Many  Panamanians 
held  a  long-standing  resentment  of  U.S.  control  of  the  Canal  Zone.  Panamanians 


6-5 


saw  the  canal  as  an  economic  bonanza  from  which  most  of  the  profits  went  to  the 
United  States.  Panamanian  merchants  resented  the  U.S.  control  of  the  Canal  Zone 
economy,  which  denied  them  sufficient  access  to  the  lucrative  market  there.  Fur¬ 
thermore,  disparities  in  pay  rates  between  Panamanian  and  American  workers  in 
the  Canal  Zone  was  considered  inherently  unfair.  Resentment  was  further  inflamed 
by  requirements  that  Panamanians  leave  the  Canal  Zone  at  night,  which  in  the  Pana¬ 
manian  view  barred  them  from  free  access  to  a  part  of  their  own  country.  These 
issues  had  a  combined  impact  that  made  many  Panamanians  feel  that  their  destiny 
as  a  people  was  not  in  their  own  hands.  Although  some  of  these  issues  were 
addressed  over  time  through  negotiations,  tensions  reached  a  boiling  point  in  the 
late  1950s  and  early  1960s.  The  Panamanian  and  American  flags  became  a  highly 
visible  symbol  of  this  tension,  which  culminated  in  the  “flag  riots”  of  1964. 

The  Flag  Riots 

Panamanians  began  to  press  for  display  of  their  national  flag  in  the  Canal  Zone.  Sev¬ 
eral  flag-related  incidents  occurred  in  1959,  and  the  Panamanian  government  for¬ 
mally  requested  the  right  to  fly  its  flag  in  the  Canal  Zone  [6.03].  On  17  September 
1960  President  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower  agreed  to  this  request  and  ordered  that  one 
dual-flag  site  be  established  in  the  Canal  Zone  at  the  area  known  as  Shaler’s  Trian¬ 
gle.  The  concession  did  little  to  quell  nationalist  sentiments,  however,  and  Panama¬ 
nians  continued  to  press  for  renegotiation  of  the  1903  Treaty.  More  rioting  occurred 
in  1962.  Following  negotiations  with  Panamanian  authorities,  President  John  F. 
Kennedy  signed  an  executive  order  in  January  1963  directing  that  whenever  the 
American  flag  was  officially  displayed  in  the  Canal  Zone,  a  Panamanian  flag  would 
accompany  it.  After  an  attempted  injunction  to  prevent  enforcement  of  this  order 
was  denied,  implementation  of  the  dual-flag  policy  was  scheduled  for  2  January 
1964.  In  an  effort  to  tone  down  the  effect  of  this  policy,  Canal  Zone  Governor  Robert 
Fleming  ordered  the  elimination  of  official  flag  sites  at  several  locations,  including 
the  Canal  Zone  high  schools.  Unaware  of  this  decision,  students  returning  from 
Christmas  break  were  surprised  and  dismayed  to  find  a  bare  flagpole  in  front  of  Bal¬ 
boa  High.16 


“The  riots  were  a  total 
surprise;  in  retrospect,  the 
situation  was  a  social  time 
bomb.  Tensions  were 
already  high  . .  .Panamani¬ 
ans  felt  harassed,  without 
sovereignty.  The  two  sides 
did  not  have  sufficient 
mutual  respect.  There  was 
never  any  groundwork  laid 
for  cooperation,  especially 
not  at  lower  social  levels.” 

Stanley  Leon15 


[6.03]  Protestors  attempting  to  enter  the  Canal 
Zone  with  flags  and  signs  are  confronted  by  the 
Panamanian  National  Guard,  26  November 
1959. 


Three  days  of  quietly  increasing  tension  broke  on  the  morning  of 
7  January  1964  when  a  group  of  students,  with  an  audience  of 
hundreds,  raised  the  American  flag  in  front  of  the  school.  To  pro¬ 
tect  this  flag  from  removal,  the  students  ringed  the  flagpole  and 
began  a  vigil  that  lasted  for  2  days.  For  the  students,  “the  general 
sympathy  the  protestors  enjoyed  at  the  high  school  was  not 
based  on  their  opposition  to  dual  flags  but  on  their  opposition  to 
the  removal  of  the  American  flag.”17  For  Panamanians,  however, 
this  act  seems  to  have  represented  an  adamant  refusal  by  the 
Canal  Zone  government  to  acknowledge  Panama’s  titular  sover¬ 
eignty  over  the  Canal  Zone.  Consequently,  on  the  afternoon  of  9 
January  1964  about  200  students  from  the  Instituto  Nacional- 
Panama’s  premier  public  high  school-marched  into  the  Canal 
Zone  with  a  historic  Panamanian  flag,  intent  on  raising  it  on  the 


6-6 


Balboa  High  School  flagpole.  In  the  highly  charged  atmosphere  the  gathering 
became  disorderly,  and  according  to  some  accounts  the  historic  flag  was  torn  in  the 
confusion.  The  students  retreated  back  across  the  border  into  Panama.18 

As  word  of  this  incident  spread,  as  many  as  3000  Panamanians  gathered  in  crowds 
on  the  Canal  Zone  border  and  began  rioting.  Cars  were  overturned  and  burned,  fire¬ 
bombs  were  thrown,  small  arms  fire  erupted,  and  buildings  were  set  on  fire.  The 
U.S.  Army  was  finally  called  in  to  protect  the  Canal  Zone  from  further  incursions. 

The  Flag  Riots  continued  for  3  days,  ending  only  when  the  Panamanian  National 
Guard  was  sent  in  to  restore  order.  Hundreds  of  people  were  injured  during  these 
disturbances;  according  to  conflicting  reports,  20  to  25  Panamanians  and  4  U.S.  mili¬ 
tary  personnel  were  killed.  Property  losses  exceeded  $2  million. 

On  18  December  1964,  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  agreed  to  negotiate  a  new 
canal  treaty  with  the  Republic  of  Panama.19 

The  Panama  Canal  Treaties  of  1977 

After  10  years  of  preliminaries  and  talks,  in  1974  U.S.  chief  negotiator  Ellsworth 
Bunker  agreed  in  principle  to  return  jurisdiction  over  the  Panama  Canal  and  the 
Canal  Zone  to  the  Republic  of  Panama.  During  the  administrations  of  U.S.  President 
Jimmy  Carter  and  General  Omar  Torrijos,  the  military  ruler  of  Panama,  the  details  of 
two  treaties  were  finalized  [6.04]. 

The  first  document,  called  the  “Panama  Canal  Treaty,”  abolished  the  Canal  Zone  and 
returned  the  territory  to  the  Republic  of  Panama;  the  United  States  retained  the 
authority  to  operate  and  defend  the  canal  until  31  December  1999.  The  second  docu¬ 
ment,  entitled  “Treaty  Concerning  the  Permanent  Neutrality  and  Operation  of  the 
Panama  Canal,”  granted  the  United  States  the  permanent  right  to  defend  the  neutrality 


[6.04]  President  Jimmy  Carter  and  First  Lady 
Rosalynn  Carter  wave  to  a  cheering  crowd  at 
Fort  Clayton,  17  June  1978. 


6-7 


of  the  Panama  Canal  even  if  the  number  of  U.S.  troops  and  bases  were  reduced.  The 
treaties  were  signed  on  7  September  1977.  After  months  of  heated  debate,  the  U.S. 
Senate  ratified  the  two  treaties  in  March  and  April  1978,  each  by  a  vote  of  68  to  32.  It 
was  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  an  era  for  U.S.  military  and  political  influence  in 
Panama.20 

Fort  Clayton  Becomes  a  Community 

From  ‘Housing’  to  ‘Home’ 

After  World  War  II  the  military  services  sought  to  retain  officers  and  enlisted  person¬ 
nel  on  a  career  basis.  As  weapons  and  defenses  grew  in  complexity  the  Army  had 
to  increase  the  time  and  resources  dedicated  to  training.  The  value  of  experience 
rose:  the  longer  the  Army  could  keep  a  well  trained  soldier  in  uniform,  the  better  an 
investment  he  was  in  the  national  defense. 

But  after  the  hardships  of  war  many  soldiers  had  the  same  impulses  to  “settle 
down”  as  anyone  else.  The  large  peacetime  Army  was  increasingly  populated  by 
soldiers  who  got  married  and  started  raising  a  family.  In  1954,  35  percent  of  military 
personnel  were  married;  by  1961  the  figure  had  risen  to  45  percent,  and  by  1977  it 
was  60  percent.  Not  surprisingly,  the  postwar  baby  boom  left  a  heavy  fallout  on  mili¬ 
tary  installations.  Barracks  were  no  place  to  raise  a  family:  it  quickly  became  clear 
to  military  leaders  that  good-quality  permanent  family  housing  was  essential  if  the 
services  were  to  recruit  and  retain  qualified  personnel.  While  the  military  buildups 
associated  with  the  Korea  and  Vietnam  conflicts  provided  periodic  impetus  for 
housing  construction  programs  at  Fort  Clayton,  the  necessity  of  retaining  quality 
personnel  was  probably  overall  the  most  important  single  driver  of  housing  con¬ 
struction  at  Fort  Clayton  since  the  1950s.21  The  Army  not  only  had  to  provide  sol¬ 
diers  with  housing ,  it  had  to  provide  them  with  homes . 

Community-Oriented  Planning 

In  1955  the  Department  of  Defense  issued  criteria  for  family  housing  that  addressed 
planning  and  design  elements  for  new  construction.22  It  was  recommended  that  the 
planning  focus  be  shifted  from  individual  quarters  more  to  the  community  level; 
amenities  such  as  privacy,  family  safety,  and  integration  of  the  natural  environment 
were  watchwords.  Over  the  next  25  years  these  criteria  would  leave  their  unmistak¬ 
able  imprint  on  the  built  environment  at  Fort  Clayton.  As  these  amenities  were  put 
into  place  in  new  housing  areas  the  results  resembled  suburbia  in  atmosphere  much 
more  than  a  regimented  military  base.  Streets  were  more  curvilinear,  following  the 
natural  rise  and  fall  of  the  topography,  and  most  terminated  in  dead  ends.  Housing 
units  were  clustered  off  the  main  roads,  and  were  often  arranged  in  small  groups 
around  short  cul-de-sacs .  These  small  groupings  improved  privacy  for  residents  and 
provided  safe  play  areas  for  children,  away  from  heavy  traffic.  For  beautification  pur¬ 
poses  family  housing  construction  projects  at  Fort  Clayton  included  landscaping 
plans.  These  designs  specified  ornamental  shrubs,  palms,  and  various  other  small 
and  large  trees  to  provide  decoration,  extra  shade,  and  to  enhance  residential  privacy. 


6-8 


The  new  housing  areas  of  this  era  were  located  east  of  the  main  post,  mostly  spread 
out  on  the  far  side  of  the  Cardenas  River  in  the  undeveloped  area  of  hills  and 
plateaus  northwest  of  the  hospital.  One  group  of  housing  was  approached  through 
the  hospital  quarters  area.  The  other  main  group  required  the  addition  of  a  new 
access  road  off  of  Morse  Avenue.  Even  farther  to  the  east  were  two  small  groups  of 
housing,  situated  south  of  the  hospital.  Both  of  these,  built  in  a  previously  undevel¬ 
oped  area,  were  accessed  from  Clayton-Albrook  Road.  The  expansion  of  family 
housing  across  the  river  made  it  necessary  to  build  a  bridge  over  the  Rio  Guana- 
bano  tributary,  a  stream  flowing  into  the  Cardenas.  A  channel  improvement  project 
in  1972  widened  the  tributary  enough  to  require  replacement  of  the  first  Rio  Guana- 
bano  bridge. 

Power  Upgrades 

As  the  Army  provided  a  higher  quality  of  life  through  housing  improvements  on 
post,  basic  services  were  upgraded  to  support  these  improvements.  Several  impor¬ 
tant  upgrades  were  completed  during  this  period.  The  electrical  distribution  system 
was  upgraded  several  times,  starting  with  rehabilitation  of  the  primary  and  sec¬ 
ondary  distribution  systems  in  1950. 

Perhaps  the  single  most  important  upgrade  was  begun  in  the  late  1950s  when  Fort 
Clayton  and  the  rest  of  the  Canal  Zone  upgraded  to  modern  60-cycle  electrical  ser¬ 
vice.  This  change  had  a  huge  impact  on  the  Fort  Clayton  lifestyle.  First,  it  made 
household  electrical  service  compatible  with  window-mounted  air  conditioners 
being  mass-produced  in  the  United  States.  Although  this  technology  had  been  on 
the  market  for  years,  it  was  unusable  in  the  Canal  Zone  because  it  was  incompatible 
with  Panama’s  antiquated  25-cycle  current.  Second,  because  the  United  States  had 
long  since  standardized  on  60-cycle  electric  service,  all  modern  U.S.-made  house¬ 
hold  appliances  were  configured  for  60-cycle  power.  As  the  upgrade  progressed 
across  the  installation,  off-duty  life  on  Fort  Clayton  increasingly  resembled  that  of 
suburbia.  After  dark  these  tidy  middle-class  neighborhoods,  like  their  counterparts 
in  the  states,  would  be  bathed  in  the  soft  blue  flicker  of  television  screens.  Indoors, 
at  least,  the  buzzing  of  mosquitoes  was  vanquished  by  the  whirring  of  air-condi¬ 
tioner  compressors. 

It  took  years  to  complete  the  conversion  of  Fort  Clayton  to  modern  electric  service. 
The  oldest  parts  of  the  installation  were  upgraded  first,  with  work  continuing 
through  the  1960s.  As  technology  progressed,  upgrades  continued.  New  transform¬ 
ers,  substation,  and  switching  station  were  erected  in  1970,  and  primary  cables 
were  replaced  in  the  early  1970s.  Streetlights  were  installed  in  new  housing  areas 
and  replaced  in  a  few  older  ones  in  1973-1974. 

Housing  Design  Drivers-Economy,  Technology,  and  Lifestyle 

Fundamental  changes  in  housing  design  were  also  showing  up  during  this  period. 
These  changes  were  driven  mostly  by  the  competing  needs  of  improving  housing 
design  and  curbing  rising  construction  costs. 


6-9 


One  basic  change  was  enabled  by  the  advent  of  6&cycle  power  and  window- 
mounted  air  conditioning  units:  because  it  was  no  longer  necessary  to  raise  houses 
above-ground  on  columns  to  catch  cooling  breezes,  one-  and  two-story  houses 
could  now  be  built  on  concrete  slabs.  This  significantly  reduced  construction  costs, 
and  even  more  money  was  saved  by  making  wider  use  of  Army-standard  construc¬ 
tion  plans. 

The  inclusion  of  laundry  facilities  in  the  housing  units  eliminated  the  need  to 
provide  protected  spaces  under  the  first  floor  for  drying  clothes.  Most  new  con¬ 
struction  used  awning  windows  instead  of  jalousies  in  order  to  better  accommo¬ 
date  the  window-mounted  air  conditioners.  It  became  standard  practice  to  install 
guttering  on  new  buildings,  and  glazed  windows  were  made  both  practical  and 
necessary  by  air  conditioning.  These  advances  in  turn  eliminated  the  need  for 
those  familiar  staples  of  tropical  architecture— deeply  overhanging  roofs  and 
mediaguas. 

Cost  containment  and  technology  improvements  did  not  completely  eliminate  tropi¬ 
cal  character  from  Canal  Zone  architecture.  The  use  of  masonry  block  construction 
and  stucco  continued,  as  did  the  taste  for  red  roofing  materials.  In  general,  how¬ 
ever,  the  postwar  housing  constructed  at  Fort  Clayton  bore  less  resemblance  to  ear¬ 
lier  housing  on  the  post  than  it  did  to  housing  on  military  installations  thousands  of 
miles  away  across  the  United  States.23 

Some  Crowning  Touches 

The  Canal  Zone  school  system  was  run  by  the  Panama  Canal  Company/Canal  Zone 
Government.  There  were  schools  located  in  various  Canal  Zone  towns  and  on  mili¬ 
tary  installations,  but  for  almost  20  years  after  the  end  of  World  War  II  Fort  Clayton 
had  no  elementary  school  of  its  own.24  Military  families  had  no  choice  except  to 
have  their  young  children  spend  hours  a  day  on  buses  (also  provided  by  the  Canal 
Zone  Government)  to  get  to  schools  on  the  west  side  of  the  canal.  In  the  1962-1963 
school  year.  Fort  Clayton’s  need  for  a  ‘hometown’  elementary  school  was  partially 
met  when  Building  129  (formerly  the  11th  Engineer  regimental  HQ  barracks)  was 
converted  to  use  for  that  purpose.25  Then  finally,  in  1967,  the  children  of  Fort  Clayton 
had  their  own  neighborhood  school  with  the  completion  of  Curundu  Elementary 
School. 

As  noted  previously,  the  upgrading  of  electric  service  and  increasing  availability  of 
modern  U.S.  appliances  spurred  the  rapid  introduction  of  television  to  the  Canal 
Zone  in  the  1950s.  To  meet  the  dawning  of  this  new  media  age,  the  SCN  radio  sta¬ 
tion  located  on  Fort  Clayton  was  outfitted  to  become  Panama’s  first  television  sta¬ 
tion  (and  was  later  the  first  to  offer  color  broadcasts).  By  1956,  instructions  for 
building  an  external  antenna  were  published  in  the  post  newspaper  in  order  to  help 
Fort  Clayton  families  ‘out  there  in  TV  land’  improve  reception  over  what  the  ‘rabbit 
ears’  could  pull  in.  Plans  for  outside  mast  antennas  attached  to  new  housing,  first 
introduced  in  1961,  were  included  in  major  housing  construction  projects  through¬ 
out  the  1960s  and  1970s  at  Fort  Clayton.26 


6-10 


Meanwhile,  Back  at  the  Movies 


■  ■  » 


Even  with  the  hypnotic  lure  of  televi¬ 
sion  in  every  living  room,  movies 
continued  to  play  a  large  part  in  off- 
duty  recreation  activity.  One  of  the 
movies  that  was  no  doubt  showing 
in  at  least  one  of  Fort  Clayton’s  two 
theaters  in  1958  was  The  Naked  and 
the  Dead ,  filmed  on  location  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  Isthmian  Paradise.  Based  on  the 
novel  by  Norman  Mailer,  the  film 
told  a  World  War  II  story  set  on  a 
Pacific  island.  Cliff  Robertson  starred 
as  a  young  Lieutenant  Hearn,  and 
Aldo  Ray  portrayed  the  veteran 
Sergeant  Croft  [6.05].  The  movie, 
which  co-starred  Joey  Bishop  and 
Raymond  Massey,  featured  the 
ruggedly  handsome  soldiers  of  the 
U.S.  Army  as  on-screen  extras  [6.06]. 

Panama’s  Hollywood  heritage  dated 
back  to  the  earliest  days  of  the  canal, 
starting  with  a  1916  silent  movie,  The 
Ne’er  Do  Well  A  few  years  later  saw 
the  filming  of  The  American  Fleet  at 
Panama ,  a  silent  1921  documentary 
on  the  activities  of  the  Department  of 
Navy  forces  in  the  Canal  Zone. 

Another  movie  shot  in  Panama  at 
the  dawn  of  the  TV  age  was  the  1958 
version  of  The  Old  Man  and  the  Sea , 
starring  Spencer  Tracy.  And  even 
though  the  stars  may  never  again 
shine  as  brightly  over  the  Panama 
Canal  as  they  did  during  the  Golden 
Age  of  Hollywood,  one  must  never¬ 
theless  not  give  in  to  the  temptation 
to  forget  all  about  Sniper ,  a  postmod¬ 
ern  nail-biter  starring  Tom  Berenger, 
Billy  Zane,  and  J.T.  Walsh-filmed  on 
location  in  Sunny  Panama. 


[6.05]  Actor  Cliff  Robertson  and  Major  General  Thomas  L.  Harrold,  Commanding 
General,  USARCARIB,  on  the  set  of  “The  Naked  and  the  Dead,”  filmed  in  Panama. 


[6.06]  Soldiers  watch  fellow  Canal  Zone  GIs  help  to  stage  the  invasion  scene  for  the  RKO 
film  “The  Naked  and  the  Dead.”  USARCARIB  troops  and  equipment  provided  an  essential 
element  of  authenticity  to  the  production. 


6-11 


Cold  War  Era  Construction  Projects 

Residential  Facilities 

Modification  and  Reutilization  of  War-Era  Housing 

As  the  postwar  troop  drawdown  proceeded  and  Fort  Clayton  found  itself  with 
excess  housing  space,  many  barracks  buildings  were  diverted  to  other  uses.  Most 
commonly,  they  were  converted  for  use  as  administrative  facilities,  with  the  floors 
subdivided  into  partitioned  offices.  Sometimes  the  entire  structure  was  diverted  to  a 
more  specialized  function.  Buildings  127  and  130,  for  example,  became  the  Defense 
Mapping  Agency  Inter-American  Geodetic  Survey  Cartographic  School.  Buildings 
154  and  155  became  primarily  Staff  Judge  Advocate  offices  and  courtroom,  and  a 
youth  center.  Building  156  was  converted  to  the  Fort  Clayton  School  Annex  in  1962, 
and  then  became  a  childcare  center  and  the  post  religious  education  facility.  Build¬ 
ing  210  became  home  to  the  Kuna  Indians  who  worked  on  post.  Except  for  the 
World  War  II  period,  Kuna  were  employed  in  various  service  jobs  on  Canal  Zone 
Army  and  Air  Force  posts  since  World  War  I  until  the  transfer  in  1999  [6.07,  6.08] 27 
They  shared  the  barracks  with  an  enlisted  men’s  club  on  the  first  floor.  At  one  point, 
Building  218  housed  the  Military  Amateur  Radio  System  (MARS)  [6.09]. 28 

Barracks  that  continued  to  function  as  single  enlisted  personnel  housing  did  not 
escape  changes,  as  most  lost  their  kitchens  and  mess  halls  to  administrative  uses. 
This  was  the  case  for  Buildings  126, 131, 202-204,  207-208,  211,  213-215,  and  217.  Cen¬ 
tral  dining  facilities  were  upgraded  in  Buildings  132,  201,  218,  and  520.  The  dining 
facilities  in  Buildings  132  and  218  were  closed  in  the  1990s.  Some  modifications  had 
to  be  made  for  the  specific  troops  being  housed.  In  1974,  Building  126  became  hous¬ 
ing  for  female  soldiers.  At  various  times,  Buildings  131  and  132  have  housed  men  and 
women  together  (separate  floors)  [6.10,  6.11].  Building  207  was  upgraded  to  house 
Special  Forces  in  1996  and  Building  219  became  NCO  bachelor  quarters  in  1963. 

Physical  changes  were  often  necessitated  by  these  function  changes  for  the  bar¬ 
racks.  Certain  uses  required  remodeling  to  eliminate  windows  and  provide  more 
security  measures.  Other  uses  required  more  space,  so  ground  floors  were  often 
enclosed  with  stuccoed  concrete  blocks  and  utilized. 


[6.07]  Two  Kuna  men  from  the  San  Bias 
Islands. 


[6.08]  Kuna  women  on  Fort  Clayton. 


[6.09]  Military  Amateur  Radio  Station  card  of 
the  2nd  Field  Artillery.  Ham  radio  operators 
would  note  the  date,  time,  group,  and  location  of 
a  contact  and  exchange  cards  with  one  another. 


6-12 


[6.10]  Soldiers  of  the  7448th  Women's  Army 
Corp  (WAC)  Detachment  Fort  Clayton,  relax  in 
their  day  room. 


[6.11]  Two  members  of  the  7448th  WAC  Detach¬ 
ment  clean  their  quarters. 


Changes  within  the  Army  as  a  whole,  and  the  Canal  Zone  in  particular,  also  created 
alterations  needs.  When  the  draft  ended  in  1973,  the  Army  sought  ways  to  make 
enlistment  attractive  to  potential  volunteer  recruits.  One  method  used  for  this  was  to 
modernize  the  living  arrangements  for  troop  housing.  These  modifications  were 
carried  out  locally  at  Forts  Clayton,  Gulick,  Kobbe,  Sherman,  Davis,  and  Amador. 
Large  squad  rooms  were  considered  unappealing,  so  they  were  subdivided  with 
partitions  into  smaller  units  housing  three  or  four  people.  The  utilities  were 
upgraded,  and  the  buildings  received  a  general  “sprucing  up.” 

This  mid-1970s  program  did  not  cover  all  barracks,  and 

another  round  of  modifications,  "Phase  I  and  II  Alterations 


6-13 


to  Facilities,"  was  undertaken  in  the  late  1970s  as  a 
result  of  the  Panama  Canal  Treaties.  When  the  treaties 
were  implemented  in  1979,  many  Army  activities  were 
consolidated  at  Fort  Clayton.  Again,  certain  functions 
required  specific  modifications,  and  the  Phase  I  and  II  pro¬ 
ject  extended  beyond  barracks  to  include  upgrades  to 
Building  95.  For  most  barracks,  the  partitioned  bays  were 
converted  to  two-man  rooms.29 

Modernization  efforts  continued  throughout  the  1980s.  The 
major  visual  exterior  modifications  were  related  to  the 
shrinking  size  of  window  openings.  Due  to  the  availability 
of  air  conditioning  and  rising  maintenance  costs,  many 
tropical-style  exteriors  started  as  large  screened 
openings  set  on  low  concrete  block  walls;  ultimately 
screens  were  replaced  with  aluminum  jalousie  windows,  then 
awning  windows,  and  finally  to  single-  or  double-hung 
aluminum  frame  sash  windows.  As  these  changes  were  made 
over  time  the  square  area  of  exterior  openings  became  pro¬ 
gressively  smaller-infilled  with  concrete  block  to  accommo¬ 
date  the  smaller  window  hardware.  By  the  end  of  this 
progression  the  size  and  number  of  open  exterior  wall 
openings  had  markedly  declined.  Another  visual  exterior 
modification  was  made  in  1987  when  the  Spanish  tile 
cladding  on  the  mediaguas  of  all  of  the  2  00  area  barracks 
were  replaced  with  red  fiberglass  shingles  [6.12]  . 


[6.12]  Line  of  100-man  barracks  at  Fort  Clayton 
showing  enclosure  of  ground  floor,  reduced  win¬ 
dow  openings,  and  shingle  cladding  materials  on 
mediaguas. 


6-14 


Early  Postwar  Officers 9  Quarters 

Two  officers’  quarters  construction  projects  were  undertaken  in  the  latter  half  of  the 
1940s:  a  set  of  NCO  duplexes  and  a  24-apartment  BOQ.  These  projects  would  be  the 
last  new  housing  construction  on  Fort  Clayton  for  a  decade. 

Bachelor  Officers *  Quarters.  The  BOQ  (Building  400)  was  similar  to  one  con¬ 
structed  at  Albrook  Field.  Based  on  1947  Corps  of  Engineers  plans,  the  building  was 
completed  in  1948  at  a  cost  of  about  $204,000.  The  rectangular,  three-story  building 
measured  240  x  36.5  ft  and  was  sited  at  the  intersection  of  Muir  and  Morse  Avenues, 
across  Muir  Avenue  from  the  temporary  officers’  quarters  built  in  1940  at  the  end  of 
Officers’  Row.  This  new  BOQ  was  located  adjacent  to  a  group  of  officers’  quarters 
built  along  Morse  Avenue  (Buildings  401-414). 

Building  400  is  a  notable  example  of  the  International  Style;  it  is  the  only  building  of 
this  style  at  Fort  Clayton  and  is  one  of  only  three  or  four  such  military  buildings  con¬ 
structed  in  the  entire  Canal  Zone.  Like  other  classic  examples  of  the  International 
Style,  Building  400  was  intentionally  devoid  of  decorative  details.  It  had  smooth  white 
stucco  walls,  a  flat  roof  with  a  wide  overhang,  cantilevered  sections,  and  plain  round 
porch  supports.  The  entire  exterior-foundation,  floors,  walls,  and  roof— was  con¬ 
structed  of  concrete  [6.13].  Style  modifications  were  made  for  the  tropical  climate, 
including  flat  concrete  mediaguas  and  a  partially  open  ground-level  floor  for  parking 
and  utilities.  Cantilevered  balconies  provided  shelter  for  lower  openings  on  one  side. 

Six  stairwells  led  upward  from  the  ground  floor.  Adjacent  to  the  stairwells  were  stor¬ 
age  rooms  and  toilet  facilities  for  janitors  and  maids.  Laundry  facilities  were  spaced 
along  the  ground  floor  as  well.  Both  the  first  and  second  floors  had  12  identical 


[6.13]  Building  400,  showing  cantilevered 
balconies. 


6-15 


apartments,  each  with  a  living  room,  kitchen,  bedroom,  and  bath.  The  living  room 
was  entered  from  the  stairs,  and  a  door  to  the  balcony  led  from  the  living  room.  The 
bedroom  was  separated  from  the  living  room  by  a  32-inch-high  counter/wardrobe; 
the  space  from  the  countertop  to  the  ceiling  was  filled  with  a  wooden  lattice  parti¬ 
tion  that  could  be  left  open  for  ventilation  or  closed  off  with  a  sliding  cloth  curtain 
for  privacy.  A  door  to  the  bedroom  was  to  the  side  of  this  counter.  Windows  were 
metal  jalousies.  Large  ventilating  fans  were  located  on  the  roof.  The  jalousies  were 
replaced  with  aluminum  awning  windows  on  the  second  and  third  floors  in  1968. 
Masonry  infill  was  applied  where  needed  to  reduce  the  size  of  the  window  opening. 
Also  at  this  time,  a  hole  was  cut  in  the  wall  below  the  center  of  the  living  room  win¬ 
dow  for  an  air  conditioning  unit. 

Building  400  was  extensively  repaired  in  1987,  and  the  air 

conditioning  system  was  upgraded  in  1989. 

Noncommissioned  Officers 9  Quarters .  Funding  for  the  NCO  quarters  (Buildings 
350-385)  came  from  leftover  World  War  II  appropriations.  An  identical  set  of  quar¬ 
ters  was  built  at  Albrook  Field  from  plans  drawn  up  by  the  District  Engineer’s  Office 
in  1947.  The  quarters  at  Fort  Clayton  were  completed  in  1949  at  an  individual  cost  of 
$21,999.  This  Corps  of  Engineers  design  was  the  first  used  at  Fort  Clayton  that  did 
not  have  a  raised  first  floor.  The  design  modification  probably  arose  from  the  need 
to  minimize  construction  costs  so  the  available  funds  would  cover  the  entire  pro¬ 
ject.  (The  amount  spent  per  unit  suggests  that  there  may  have  been  a  specific  per- 
unit  cost  ceiling  of  under  $22,000.)  But  since  these  quarters  provided  no  space  for 
ground-floor  parking,  carports  were  provided  instead.  In  these  duplex  quarters,  the 
carport  design  was  integrated  into  the  housing  unit. 

The  site  chosen  for  these  new  quarters  was  on  the  north  side  of  the  block  of  quar¬ 
ters  constructed  during  World  War  II  (300-340).  As  the  topography  of  this  site  was 
rather  steep,  the  area  was  graded  into  a  series  of  plateaus  that  stepped  down  to 
Morse  Avenue  [6.14].  All  the  planned  quarters  would  not  fit  into  this  area,  so  eight 


[6.14]  View  from  Quarters  370-375  showing 
terraced  earthworks. 


6-16 


vere  built  on  the  far  side  of  Morse  Avenue,  running  in  a  line  facing  the  avenue.  This 
placement  completed  the  arc  of  housing  running  along  the  perimeter  of  the  open 
ecreation  area.30 

rhe  36  NCO  buildings  provided  72  identical  three-bedroom,  one-bath  housing  units. 
Constructed  on  a  concrete  slab,  each  one-story  building  was  rectangular,  with  two  16 
:t  wings  extending  to  the  rear.  The  exterior  walls  were  concrete  block,  and  the  low- 
pitched  overhanging  roof  was  covered  with  red  corrugated  asbestos  to  simulate  the 
appearance  of  Spanish  tile.  The  original  windows  were  metal  jalousies.  The  interior 
provided  three  bedrooms  and  a  bath  along  the  far  end  and  wing.  Across  a  corridor, 
there  was  a  combined  living/dining  room,  and  a  kitchen  next  to  the  shared  wall.  In 
the  front  center  was  a  covered  carport  for  both  families.  This  extension  was  matched 
in  the  rear  by  a  covered  utility  area  with  laundry  facilities  and  a  maid’s  toilet.  The 
extensions  were  covered  by  continuous  roofing  from  the  main  block,  and  supported 
by  corner  posts.  There  was  a  front  door  entering  into  the  living  room,  and  a  service 
door  from  the  carport  into  the  kitchen.  A  rear  door  was  located  in  the  kitchen,  as  well. 

Built  before  the  widespread  introduction  of  air  conditioning,  these  quarters  were 
designed  to  ventilate  the  interior  as  much  as  possible.  Between  the  carport  and  the 
kitchen,  a  wooden  grille  filled  space  along  the  top  of  the  wall.  All  exterior  doors  had 
louvered  openings.  On  the  interior,  the  middle  bedroom  had  only  one  set  of  win¬ 
dows.  To  provide  some  cross-ventilation,  the  bedroom/hall  wall  had  a  wooden 
grille  above  the  7  ft  height.  The  living/dining  room/hall  wall  was  composed  entirely 
of  fixed  wooden  louvers  running  floor  to  ceiling.  When  central  air  conditioning  was 
installed  in  1976,  the  interior  wood  grilles  and  louvers  were  removed,  and  the 
jalousie  windows  replaced  with  double  hung  sash  windows.  The  openings  left  by 
the  smaller  windows  were  filled  in  with  masonry  blocks. 

Construction  Under  the  Capehart  Housing  Program 

The  lack  of  postwar  appropriations  greatly  restricted  the  ability  of  the  newly  reorga¬ 
nized  Department  of  Defense  (DoD)  to  solve  its  military  housing  problems.  To 
address  these  problems  several  DoD  and  Congressional  programs  were  created  over 
the  years.  Among  the  first  of  these  was  the  Capehart  housing  program.  Named  for 
Senator  Homer  Capehart,  sponsor  of  the  Capehart  Housing  Act  of  1955,  this  program 
provided  the  military  services  with  some  economic  leverage  to  help  pay  for  new 
housing.  Funding  for  the  construction  was  provided  by  private  lending  agencies; 
once  the  new  housing  was  occupied,  the  military  service  took  ownership  and  retired 
the  mortgages  through  allowances  from  an  appropriated  fund.  The  Capehart  pro¬ 
gram,  along  with  its  predecessor,  the  Wherry  program,  supported  the  construction 
of  approximately  55,000  family  housing  units  (mostly  in  the  United  States)  before  it 
ended  in  the  early  1960s.  The  Capehart  program  promoted  the  construction  of  sin¬ 
gle-family  and  duplex  quarters  to  enhance  the  privacy  and  safety  of  the  occupants. 
Design  criteria  specified  by  DoD  included  climatic  considerations.  Warm  climates 
were  best  served  by  single-story  buildings  with  low  pitched  roofs.  The  enabling  legis¬ 
lation  for  the  Capehart  program  required  the  use  of  plans  based  on  modular  units  for 
purposes  of  cost  control  and  design  versatility.  Simple,  rectangular  structural  forms 
were  preferred  for  purposes  of  constructability  and  economy. 


6-17 


The  Capehart  quarters  at  Fort  Clayton  were  the  first  family  housing  units  that  were 
not  built  on  previously  undeveloped  land.  With  the  large  number  of  barracks  built 
for  World  War  II  and  the  subsequent  reduction  in  troops,  the  old  1920  infantry  battal¬ 
ion  barracks  were  no  longer  needed  while  family  housing  increased  in  priority.  For 
these  reasons  the  four  old  concrete  barracks  were  demolished  in  1957  [6.15]. 
Because  the  old  battalion  headquarters  barracks  still  served  administrative  and 
retail  purposes,  however,  that  facility  remained  standing  for  a  few  more  years. 

The  land  freed  up  by  this  demolition  project  was  designated  the  site  for  a  group  of 
1960  NCO  Capehart  family  quarters.  (NCO  Capehart  quarters  were  also  constructed 
that  year  at  Fort  Amador,  Curundu,  Corozal,  and  Quarry  Heights,  and  Fort  Davis 
received  Capehart  quarters  in  1962.)  Fifty-three  of  the  new  Capehart  quarters 
(Buildings  470-481,  804, 806,  808-813,  816-841,  843,  850-867)  filled  the  former  quad¬ 
rangle  with  six  rows  of  housing  on  three  streets,  also  annexing  the  area  to  the  south 
formerly  occupied  by  the  33rd  Infantry  stables  (which  were  demolished  in  the 
1950s).  A  smaller  group  of  12  Capehart  quarters  was  located  toward  the  medical 
complex,  near  the  Hospital  Road  bridge.33 

Built  as  part  of  the  FY  1958  program,  the  quarters  were  completed  in  1960  at  an  indi¬ 
vidual  cost  of  about  $24,700.  The  quarters  were  designed  by  the  Corps  of  Engineers, 
Jacksonville  District,  and  Joseph  H.  Bryson,  Architect,  Jacksonville  under  FHA  Title 
VIII  Projects  #063-81008  Army  1  and  #063-81009  Army  2.  The  duplex  quarters  were  set 
on  a  concrete  foundation,  had  concrete  masonry  walls,  and  built-up  roofs  [6.16] .  Mea¬ 
suring  96  x  27.3  ft,  each  building  housed  two  sets  of  quarters,  each  with  three  bed¬ 
rooms.  Each  unit  included  a  12  x  20.6  ft  carport  on  the  far  end  and  a  10  x  20  ft  patio. 


[6.15]  The  518th  Combat  Engineers  use  a  “headache  ball”  to  demolish  Building  29. 


“It's  a  metamorphosis  in 
concrete,  from  one-time 
beautiful,  white,  up-to-date 
barracks  to  heaps  of 
broken,  age-stained  chunks. 
This  is  the  story  of  the  first 
buildings  that  constituted 
Fort  Clayton,  four  large  bar¬ 
racks  fronting  Gailiard  High¬ 
way,  that  are  presently 
being  demolished  by  a  pla¬ 
toon  of  the  518th  Engineer 
Company.  It  is  referred  to  as 
'Operation  Demolition' . .  .”32 


[6.16]  1990s  photo  of  Capehart  NCO  quarters, 
Building  820. 


6-18 


Each  unit  had  two  entrances-one  off  the  carport  into  the  kitchen  and  one  at  the 
front  that  opened  into  the  living  room  (which  was  adjacent  to  the  kitchen).  A  dining 
room  adjoined  the  kitchen  in  the  rear.  A  central  hallway  led  to  the  sleeping  quarters 
with  two  bedrooms  on  one  side,  and  one  bedroom  with  a  half  bath,  and  a  full  bath 
on  the  other  side.  All  windows  were  aluminum  jalousie  with  glass  louvers.  Next  to 
the  front  door,  toward  the  center,  was  a  decorative  masonry  wall  to  provide  some 
privacy  for  the  two  families  of  occupants  in  each  duplex.  The  same  decorative 
masonry  was  used  to  construct  the  two  piers  supporting  the  carport.  Central  air 
conditioning  was  installed  in  1977-1978. 

The  jalousies  were  replaced  with  single-hung  aluminum  sash 
windows  in  1981,  and  some  of  the  exterior  wall  opening  was 
lost.  The  carport  and  patio  roofs  were  replaced  in  19  84. 

1964 Bachelor  Officers  ’  Quarters 

Two  identical  8-man  BOQs  (Buildings  157  and  500)  were  constructed  in  1964  at  a 
cost  of  $49,991  each.  Building  157  was  located  across  Muir  Avenue  from  the  south¬ 
ern  edge  of  the  original  officers’  quarters  area,  and  at  the  northeastern  end  of  the 
line  created  by  barracks  Buildings  154-156.  The  second  BOQ,  Building  500,  was 
located  at  the  entrance  to  the  hospital-area  NCO  housing.  The  one-story  rectangular 
structures  measured  105.1  x  30.5  ft,  with  the  front  center  area  recessed  approxi¬ 
mately  4.5  ft.  Set  on  concrete  foundations,  the  concrete  block  walls  supported  a 
built-up  roof.  The  structures  were  duplexes,  with  two  identical  halves.  Entrance 
doors  were  located  at  the  outer  edge  of  the  recessed  area,  and  led  into  an  entrance 
hall.  Toward  the  center  was  the  kitchen,  and  the  hall  terminated  in  the  living  room, 
which  was  behind  the  kitchen.  There  was  a  10  x  16.5  ft  concrete  terrace  accessible 
from  the  living  room.  A  hallway  led  toward  the  outer  end  of  the  building  where  four 
bedrooms  formed  a  square.  Two  bedrooms  shared  a  common  bath  located 
between  them.  Building  157  had  on-street  parking  with  two  2-car  carports.  Building 
500  had  a  detached  garage  and  parking  lot  off  the  road  south  of  the  BOQ.  Central  air 
conditioning  was  part  of  the  original  design.  Covered  patios  were  added  in  1969. 

1965 NCO  Housing 

In  FY62  the  Army  began  the  largest  housing  project  initiated  at  Fort  Clayton  up  to 
that  time.  As  a  Military  Construction,  Army  (MCA)  project,  funding  was  secured 
through  Congressional  approval  and  appropriation  as  a  line  item  request.  As  such, 
each  specific  housing  project  had  to  be  approved  individually.  This  was  the  first  of 
three  large  MCA-funded  projects  to  increase  family  housing  at  Fort  Clayton  and  other 
Canal  Zone  posts.  This  was  also  the  first  construction  project  sited  in  the  undevel¬ 
oped  area  across  the  Cardenas  River  between  the  main  post  and  the  1940s-era  med¬ 
ical  complex.  The  123  buildings  constructed  at  Fort  Clayton  under  contract 
DA-08-123-ENG-4995,  completed  in  1965,  provided  492  NCO  housing  units.  All  were 
apartment-type  structures,  each  housing  four  families.  The  four-family  plan  allowed 
the  Army  to  save  on  construction  costs  (by  erecting  fewer  buildings)  but  still  offered 
a  reasonable  amount  of  privacy  to  the  occupants.  Buildings  of  three  different  sizes 
were  constructed  to  provide  two-,  three-,  and  four-bedroom  units.  The  per-building 


6-19 


construction  costs  were  approximately  $50,700,  $57,300,  and  $66,000,  respectively. 
Carports,  which  were  constructed  at  the  same  time,  were  clustered  in  groups  of 
three  or  four  in  cul-de-sacs  or  alongside  the  road.  Each  family  was  allotted  space  for 
one  car.  Playgrounds  away  from  traffic  were  constructed  in  the  housing  areas. 

All  buildings  were  constructed  on  concrete  foundations  with  concrete  block  walls 
and  built-up  roofs.  The  three-bedroom  style  was  most  common,  and  included  Build¬ 
ings  532-540,  542-549,  552-555,  557-561,  600-602,  605-606,  608-610,  612-615, 
618-629,  632-639,  641-650,  652-653,  655,  657-59,  661-674,  676,  678-685,  and 
687-691.  Measuring  89.3  x  29.3  ft,  the  rectangular  buildings  were  two  stories  tall.  A 
recessed  central  stairway  provided  access  to  the  upper  floor.  Decorative  concrete 
blocks  provided  a  screening  wall  for  the  second-floor  stairway.  The  low-pitched 
roof  had  3  ft  overhangs.  Stacked  concrete  blocks  under  the  windows  on  the  front 
and  sides  provided  visual  relief  as  spandrels.  Aluminum  awning  style  windows  were 
used.  Two  complete  apartments  were  laid  out  on  each  floor.  The  exterior  door  led 
into  the  living  room  at  the  front  of  the  building,  and  the  living  room  opened  into  the 
dining  room  at  the  rear.  A  storage  room  was  accessed  from  the  dining  room.  The 
kitchen,  also  at  the  rear  of  the  building,  was  located  off  the  dining  room.  The  first- 
floor  apartments  had  a  back  door  leading  from  the  kitchen.  A  flat  concrete  canopy 
protected  the  back  door.  From  the  living  room,  a  central  hall  led  back  to  a  full  bath 
on  the  left,  followed  by  a  bedroom  with  a  half  bath.  There  were  two  bedrooms  on 
the  right.  The  second  floor  layout  was  identical,  except  for  the  exterior  kitchen 
doors.  The  apartments  were  centrally  air  conditioned  [6.17]. 

There  were  11  two-bedroom  apartments  (Buildings  531,  541,  551,  603,  604,  611,  617, 
631,  654,  656,  and  677).  The  two-story  rectangular  buildings  measured  78.6  x  29.3  ft. 
They  were  the  same  as  the  three-bedroom  units  except  that  the  central  hall  had  a 
bath  on  the  right,  then  a  bedroom  on  each  side.  Buildings  550,  556,  607,  616,  630, 
640,  651,  660,  675,  and  686  each  had  four-bedroom  apartments.  Each  two-story  rec¬ 
tangular  building  measured  102.6  x  29.3  ft.  Again,  the  only  difference  in  layout  was 
the  bedroom/bath  arrangement.  Down  the  central  hall,  to  the  right  there  was  a  bed¬ 
room,  then  a  bath,  then  a  bedroom  with  an  attached  bath.  On  the  left  side  there 
were  two  bedrooms.  The  second  floor  was  identical,  except  for  the  kitchen  doors. 

The  NCO  quarters  received  new  galvanized  metal  roofs  in 

1984,  and  had  their  aluminum  awning  windows  replaced  with 

single-hung  sash  windows  in  1987. 34 

1965  Officer  Housing 

As  part  of  the  FY62  MCA  construction  project,  20  units  of  field  grade  officer  housing 
were  built  at  Fort  Clayton  for  the  State  Department.  The  10  duplexes  (Buildings 
22-26,  460-464)  housed  personnel  from  the  American  Embassy  and  related  offices 
such  as  the  Foreign  Information  Broadcast  Service.  This  service  monitored  ail  radio 
and  television  broadcasts  from  Central  and  South  America.  The  quarters  were  con¬ 
structed  in  two  groups:  half  on  Hawkins  Avenue  where  the  original  33rd  Infantry  HQ 
(Building  21)  had  stood,  and  the  other  half  on  Morse  Avenue  near  the  group  of  1942 
officers  quarters.35 


[6.17]  1990s  photo  of  1965  four-family,  three- 
bedroom  NCO  apartments  (Building  554). 


6-20 


The  two-story  duplex  quarters  were  designed  and  constructed  in  two  styles:  three- 
and  four-bedroom.  Construction  was  completed  in  early  1965  at  a  per-building  cost 
of  about  $41,300  and  $44,800,  respectively.  Both  styles  were  built  on  a  concrete 
foundation  with  concrete  block  walls.  The  low-pitched  built-up  roofs  had  3  ft  over¬ 
hanging  eaves.  Aluminum  awning  type  windows  were  used.  Each  unit  had  a  cov¬ 
ered  carport  at  the  end  of  the  building  with  a  small  storage  room  located  near  the 
rear  outside  end  of  the  carport.  Each  unit  also  had  a  rear  terrace,  and  both  types 
were  designed  to  incorporate  an  air  conditioning  system. 

The  three-bedroom  style  (Buildings  23,  26,  460,  464)  was  a  rectangular  structure 
measuring  56  x  29.3  ft.  A  door  from  the  carport  led  into  the  kitchen,  and  a  front 
door  led  into  the  living  room,  which  was  laid  out  across  the  front  of  each  unit.  The 
living  room  was  open  to  the  dining  room  at  the  back  of  the  unit  across  from  the 
kitchen  [6.18],  A  rear  door  led  out  from  the  dining  room  to  the  terrace.  Stairs  in  the 
rear  corner  of  the  living  room  led  upstairs.  The  second  floor  had  three  bedrooms 
forming  three  corners  of  the  unit.  The  last  corner  was  occupied  by  two  full  baths, 
one  of  which  was  a  master  bath  attached  to  a  bedroom. 

The  four-bedroom  style  was  dissimilar  in  appearance  to  the  three-bedroom  build¬ 
ings:  these  two-story  units  were  joined  by  a  one-story  middle  section  that  housed 
the  master  bedroom  and  attached  full  bath  for  each  unit-one  behind  the  other.  The 
unit  layout  was  essentially  the  same  as  the  other  styles  in  the  two-story  sections 
except  the  second  story  had  only  one  full  bath  and  a  storage  area.  The  terraces 
were  converted  to  covered  patios  in  1969,  with  masonry  columns  supporting  a  cor¬ 
rugated  metal  roof. 


1969  Officer,  NCO,  and  Civilian  Housing 


The  second  large  postwar  MCA  housing  project  in  the  Canal  Zone  was  completed 
by  1969.  Plans  were  drawn  up  in  1967  by  the  Jacksonville  District,  Corps  of  Engi¬ 
neers,  and  Joseph  H.  Bryson,  Architect-Engineer,  Jacksonville.  This  project 


[6.18]  1965  two-story  duplex  officers’  quarters 
on  Morse  Avenue. 


6-21 


included  housing  for  Fort  Clayton,  Fort  Davis,  Fort  Gulick,  and  Quarry  Heights 
under  contract  DACA  17-68-C-0027.  The  largest  share  of  housing  went  to  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton,  where  236  units  were  built.  Two  areas  of  NCO  quarters  were  built  with  a  total  of 
118  units.  The  first  was  a  continuation  of  the  500  housing  area  near  the  hospital,  and 
included  Buildings  570-581.  The  second  (Buildings  700-709,  715-726)  was  an  exten¬ 
sion  of  the  600  area,  which  also  was  across  the  Cardenas  River  from  the  main  post. 
This  project  also  included  officer  and  civilian  housing,  both  located  south  of  the 
hospital  off  the  Clayton-Albrook  Road  in  a  previously  undeveloped  area.  The  64- 
units  of  officer  housing  (Buildings  1000-1003,  1005-1007,  1009-1010,  1012-1014, 
1023-1033)  were  sited  nearest  the  hospital.  The  civilian  housing  area  was  further  to 
the  east,  and  comprised  54  units  (NCO  and  officer  styles)  in  Buildings  1041-1043, 
1047-1062.  The  housing  areas  were  laid  out  with  the  buildings  or  parking  facilities 
clustered  along  and  at  the  ends  of  dead  end  streets. 

All  buildings  and  apartments  in  this  project  were  two  stories  and  configured  in 
groups  of  two,  four,  or  six  apartments  per  building.  All  were  built  on  concrete  foun¬ 
dations  with  concrete  block  walls  and  low-pitched  built-up  roofs.  Air  conditioning 
systems  were  built  in,  and  the  compressors,  in  either  the  front  or  rear  of  the  unit, 
were  surrounded  by  decorative  concrete  masonry  walls.  All  buildings  had  single- 
hung  aluminum  windows  on  the  first  floor  and  double-hung  sash  windows  on  the 
second  floor.  Six  basic  styles  were  used  for  the  housing  units.  High-ranking  officers 
quarters  were  two-family  units  and  were  distinguished  by  the  addition  of  a  dining 
room,  extra  storage  space,  and  individual  carports. 

The  two-bedroom  units  were  constructed  as  four-family  (EC2D4)  and  six-family 
buildings  (EC2D6).  The  second  floor  of  this  building  style  had  vertical  grooved  ply¬ 
wood  siding  on  the  front,  with  plywood  panels  under  the  windows.  These  quarters 
were  for  both  NCO  and  CGO  (company  grade  officer)  personnel.  The  front  door  led 
into  an  entry  hall  with  a  kitchen  on  the  left  and  a  half-bath/ laundry  combination  on 
the  right.  The  hall  ended  in  the  living  room,  which  occupied  the  rear  of  the  unit.  An 
exterior  door  led  to  the  patio  in  the  back.  Concrete  masonry  privacy  walls  extended 
out  from  the  ends  of  the  units,  and  the  middle  area  between  each  pair  of  units  pro¬ 
vided  a  storage  room  for  each  family.  Stairs  in  the  living  room  led  up  to  a  full  bath, 
storage  room,  and  two  bedrooms  laid  out  along  the  outer  wall. 

The  three-bedroom,  four-family  (E3A4)  NCO  units  had  the  same  exterior  as  the  two- 
bedroom  buildings,  including  plywood  siding  and  the  same  types  of  privacy  walls 
and  storage  areas  in  the  rear.  The  front  door  led  to  an  entry  hall  with  the  bath/laun¬ 
dry  combination  on  the  left  and  the  kitchen  on  the  right.  The  living  room  occupied 
the  rear  of  the  unit  and  had  a  door  to  the  patio.  Stairs  led  from  the  living  room  to  the 
second  floor.  Two  bedrooms  were  laid  out  against  the  back  wall  and  one  was 
located  at  the  front  outside  corner.  A  full  bath  occupied  the  inside  corner. 

The  four-bedroom  NCO  units  came  in  two  sizes:  four-family  (E4A4)  and  two-family 
(E4A2).  The  design  was  identical  to  the  E3A4  with  two  exceptions.  First,  the  exte¬ 
rior  of  the  second  floor  had  horizontal  plywood  siding  on  the  front  and  rear  [6.19]. 
Second,  there  were  bedrooms  in  every  corner  of  the  second  floor,  and  the  full  bath 
was  placed  at  the  middle  of  the  interior  wall.  The  four-bedroom  CGO  units  also 


[6.19]  1969  NCO  housing  (Building  726,  front) 
showing  horizontal  siding  on  exterior. 


6-22 


came  in  both  four-family  (C4A4)  and  two-family  (C4A2)  sizes.  These  were  identical 
to  the  NCO  four-bedroom  units  except  for  the  second  floor  exterior  having  the  verti¬ 
cal  grooved  plywood  siding  and  plywood  window  panels  on  the  front  and  rear. 

There  were  two  field  grade  officer  (FGO)  housing  configurations  constructed  under 
this  program:  a  three-bedroom  and  a  four-bedroom  building.  Both  types  were 
duplexes  providing  individual  carports  as  part  of  the  design,  with  stacked  concrete 
blocks  beside  the  doors  to  highlight  the  front  elevation,  and  second-floor  balconies. 
The  three-bedroom  units  (F3B2)  had  two  carports  located  at  the  center  front  of  the 
building,  and  there  were  two  concrete  masonry  storage  buildings  between  the  car¬ 
ports.  The  carports  had  front-gabled,  low-pitched  roofs;  the  gables  were  filled  with 
vertical  plywood  siding.  Concrete  masonry  piers  supported  the  roof  on  the  front 
and  sides  of  the  carports.  A  carport  door  led  into  the  kitchen,  and  a  front  door  led 
into  an  entry  hall.  The  bath/laundry  room  on  the  left  was  followed  by  a  closet,  with 
a  stairway  leading  up  on  the  right.  The  living  room  was  placed  at  the  outside  rear 
corner  of  the  unit  and  was  open  to  the  dining  room  located  behind  the  kitchen.  A 
rear  door  led  from  the  dining  room  to  the  patio.  Upstairs  a  center  hallway  led  to 
bedrooms  in  the  rear  corners  and  the  front  outside  corner,  with  a  full  bath  at  the 
front  inside  corner.  The  front  bedroom  had  access  to  the  balcony  [6.20].  All  bed¬ 
rooms  had  walk-in  closets.  The  master  bedroom,  located  at  the  rear  inside  corner, 
had  a  full  bath. 

The  four-bedroom  FGO  style  (F4A2)  had  carports  on  either  end  of  the  building. 
Covered  with  side-gable,  low-pitched  roofs,  the  carports  had  concrete  masonry 
walls  along  the  outside  and  partially  across  the  front.  The  interior  of  this  wall  pro¬ 
vided  a  line  of  wooden  cabinets  with  louvered  doors  [6.21].  A  carport  door  led  to 
the  kitchen,  and  the  front  door  led  to  an  entry  hall.  A  stairway  was  located  on  the 
left  side  of  the  hall,  and  the  bath/laundry  room  was  located  on  the  right.  The  hall¬ 
way  opened  into  the  living  room  in  the  inside  corner  which,  in  turn,  was  open  to 
the  dining  room  behind  the  kitchen.  A  door  from  the  dining  room  led  outside  to  the 


[6.20]  1969  officer  housing  (Building  1028)  showing  center  carports 
with  storage  areas  and  second-floor  balconies. 


[6.21]  1969  officer  housing  (Building  1061)  showing  detail  of  louvered 
folding  doors  for  carport  storage  area. 


6-23 


-  * 
sli 


patio.  The  second  floor  had  a  full  bath  and  a  master  bedroom  that  extended  the 
length  of  the  outside  wall,  with  a  walk-in  closet  and  full  bath  attached.  Across  the 
hall,  there  were  two  bedrooms  along  the  rear  and  one  in  the  front  inside  corner. 
This  last  bedroom  had  access  to  the  balcony. 

In  1971  some  additional  finishing  work  was  done  on  these  housing  areas.  Concrete 
patios  were  completed  for  all  units,  new  play  areas  were  installed  complete  with 
equipment,  and  new  sidewalks  were  added.  Over  time  the  built-up  roofs  were 
replaced  with  corrugated  metal. 

Operations  and  Support  Facility  Construction 

Operations  and  support  construction  during  this  era  was  minimal,  and  mostly  com¬ 
pleted  by  the  mid-1950s.  Structures  completed  during  1947  included  a  water  tank 
(Facility  450),  radio  station  (Building  913),  and  warehouse  (Building  178). 

The  water  tank  was  located  in  a  secluded  area  on  the  hill  near  Quarters  434,  and 
was  a  duplicate  of  one  constructed  at  Albrook  Air  Force  Station.  Both  tanks,  which 
held  750,000  gallons,  were  built  of  concrete  with  a  corrugated  iron  shed  on  a  plat¬ 
form  halfway  up  the  tank.  Farther  up  the  hill  was  the  radio  station,  which  in  1971 
was  changed  in  designation  to  a  general-purpose  warehouse.  The  25  x  20  ft  con¬ 
crete  building  was  demolished  by  the  Corps  of  Engineers  in  1978.  Building  178, 
which  was  constructed  in  February  1947,  was  designed  as  a  warehouse  to  service 
the  11th  Engineers  compound  northwest  of  the  stable/motor  pool  area. 

A  new  installation  entrance  and  sentry  booth  (Building  99),  built  in  1954,  put  a  fresh 
face  on  Fort  Clayton  [6.22].  Completed  at  a  cost  of  $1440,  the  41  sq  ft  concrete  guard 
booth  measured  4.6  x  9  ft. 


[6.22]  The  new  main  entrance  to  Fort  Clayton 
under  construction  (c.  1954). 


6-24 


In  1988  this  guard  booth  at  Fort  Clayton  (along  with  others 
at  various  Canal  Zone  installations)  was  demolished  and 
replaced  with  a  similar  structure  as  part  of  a  routine 
upgrade.  A  major  landscaping  and  security  upgrade  project 
at  the  front,  side,  and  rear  gates  of  Fort  Clayton  was 
undertaken  in  1993  as  part  of  the  worldwide  Army 
Communities  of  Excellence  (ACOE)  program  [6.23].  One  of 
ACOE's  several  goals  was  to  improve  the  visual 
environment -both  natural  and  built-of  Army  installations. 

The  final  significant  construction  during  this  era  was  the  construction  of  a  small 
arms  pistol  range  (Facility  235)  and  a  range  house  (Building  236),  both  completed 
in  1956.  Located  northwest  of  Building  180,  the  range  was  located  at  the  top  of  a  hill 
overlooking  the  Coast  Artillery  barracks  quadrangle  [6.24].  When  completed,  the 


[6.23]  The  original  (side)  gate  at  Fort  Clayton, 
September  1953. 


[6.24]  Overview  from  the  pistol  range. 


6-25 


pistol  range  included  ten  targets,  at  50-,  35-,  25-,  and  15-yard  distances.  The  range 
house,  which  was  built  on  a  concrete  pedestal  with  earth-and-gravel  flooring  and 
open  walls,  was  relocated  to  Fort  Clayton  from  Fort  Sherman.  A  14  ft  high  observa¬ 
tion  tower  (Facility  240),  also  erected  in  1956,  completed  the  range. 

Community  Facilities 

Most  of  the  construction  at  Fort  Clayton  during  this  era,  other  than  housing,  con¬ 
sisted  of  community  social,  education,  recreation,  and  athletic  facilities.  Like  the 
housing  built  during  this  time,  the  design  and  style  of  these  facilities  reflected  the 
new  family-oriented  Army.  Clearly  it  was  no  longer  true  that  “If  soldiers  were 
intended  to  have  wives  and  families,  Uncle  Sam  would  have  issued  them.”  Instead, 
Uncle  Sam  was  building  places  for  them  to  live,  work,  and  play  [6.25,  6.26]. 


[6.26]  Petting  zoo  in  Miller  Field  recreation 
area,  1950s. 


6-26 


Reutilization  of  Building  95  as  Community  Services  Center 

Utilization  of  Building  95  changed  radically  in  1961  when  it  was  remodeled  and  con¬ 
verted  into  a  community  services  building  with  a  PX  [6.27] .  The  first  floor  contained 
retail  space,  a  cafeteria  and  kitchen,  offices,  tailor  shop,  watch  repair  shop,  dry 
cleaner,  shoe  repair  shop,  photo  shop,  barber  and  beauty  shops,  radio/TV  repair 
shop,  and  laundromat.  Warehousing  and  receiving  occurred  in  the  rear.  The  sec¬ 
ond  floor  contained  more  retail  space,  stock  rooms,  offices,  and  warehouse  space. 
The  third  floor  held  offices  for  PX  staff.  A  large  parking  lot  was  built  primarily  for 
Building  95  about  the  same  time.  Located  at  the  corner  of  Morse  and  Gaillard 
Avenues,  it  had  spaces  for  198  cars. 

In  addition  to  the  PX,  the  first  floor  of  Building  95  housed  a  post  office  and  the  Army 
Education  Center  with  offices  and  laboratories  for  language  and  radio  code  studies. 
On  the  second  floor,  the  Post  Library  moved  in  during  1962.  The  third  floor  held 
additional  facilities  for  the  Education  Center,  with  classrooms,  study  rooms,  and  an 
assembly  room.  The  building  also  served  as  Post  Headquarters.  By  1973,  some  shuf¬ 
fling  of  occupants  had  occurred  with  a  thrift  shop,  a  library  service  center,  a  recruit¬ 
ment  office,  dry  cleaners,  optical  shop,  and  Cub  Scout  office  having  moved  into  the 
first  floor. 

Post  Chapel 

The  original  temporary  wood-sided  post  chapel  was  replaced  in  1965  with  a  perma¬ 
nent  concrete  structure.  Constructed  on  the  same  site  as  the  temporary  structure, 
and  designated  as  Building  64  like  its  predecessor,  the  new  chapel  was  designed  by 
the  firm  of  Herschel  E.  Shepard,  Jr.  (Architect)  and  Evans  &  Hammond,  Incorpo¬ 
rated  (Engineers),  of  Jacksonville,  Florida.  The  plans  were  approved  in  Panama  by 
Colonel  Harold  R.  Parfitt,  representing  the  Corps  of  Engineers  district  office. 
Colonel  Parfitt  went  on  to  serve  as  the  last  Governor  of  the  Canal  Zone  prior  to  its 
abolishment  in  1979. 


[6.27]  The  Post  Exchange  Shopping  Center  at 
Building  95. 


6-27 


As  originally  designed,  the  chapel  contained  a  bridal  room,  choir  room,  two  assem¬ 
bly  rooms,  a  kitchen,  chaplain’s  office,  and  chaplain’s  assistant’s  office,  as  well  as 
the  traditional  military  multi-denominational  altar  and  ark  rooms,  narthex,  nave, 
chancel,  baptistery,  sacristy,  vestibule,  and  confessional.  The  building  was  designed 
with  central  air  conditioning,  which  was  a  growing  trend  at  that  time.  The  chapel 
was  officially  dedicated  in  a  ceremony  held  on  9  May  1965.  Prior  to  the  transfer  of 
Fort  Clayton  in  1999  a  commemorative  medallion  was  struck  recognizing  the 
chapel’s  35  years  of  service  to  the  Panama  Canal  community.36 

Curundu  Elementary  School 

A  new  school,  the  Curundu  Elementary  School,  was  constructed  at  Fort  Clayton  for 
the  opening  of  the  school  year  in  the  fall  of  1967.3/  This  was  Fort  Clayton’s  second 
school  building,  the  first  of  which  had  been  established  in  1962  by  renovating  Build¬ 
ing  129  for  that  purpose.  Like  the  other  schools  in  the  Canal  Zone,  Curundu  Ele¬ 
mentary  was  managed  by  the  Panama  Canal  Company  (PCC)  until  implementation 
of  the  Panama  Canal  Treaties  of  1977,  when  it  was  transferred  to  the  jurisdiction  of 
the  Department  of  Defense  Dependents’  School  (DoDDS)  system.  The  school  com¬ 
plex,  which  was  composed  of  four  centrally  air  conditioned  main  buildings,  was 
located  on  a  secluded  tract  of  land  near  the  back  gate  of  Fort  Clayton.  Building  775 
(originally  designated  Building  616-A)  was  sited  parallel  to  Clayton-Albrook  Road. 
Building  776  (originally  designated  Building  616-B)  was  sited  just  south  of  Building 
775,  and  perpendicular  to  it.  Next  to  that  building  and  parallel  to  it  was  Building  777 
(originally  616-C).  These  three  classroom  buildings  housed  a  total  of  46,976  sq  ft. 
Each  building  was  64  ft  wide  and  197-283  ft  long.  A  play  shelter,  Facility  778,  was 
located  immediately  north  of  Building  775. 

Building  776  held  eight  classrooms  flanking  a  central  hallway,  two  “itinerant  teach¬ 
ing  rooms,  restrooms,  two  multi-purpose  rooms,  an  air  conditioning  equipment 
room,  and  a  storage  room.  Building  777  comprised  14  classrooms  flanking  a  central 
hall  with  restrooms  in  the  center  of  the  building.  By  1988,  when  the  buildings  were 
upgraded,  Building  775  housed  a  general  office  room,  principal’s  office,  teachers’ 
lounge,  nurse’s  office,  four  kindergarten  rooms,  seven  other  classrooms,  two  spe¬ 
cial  education  rooms,  restrooms,  and  two  air  conditioning  equipment  rooms.  All 
three  buildings  were  constructed  with  concrete  floors  on  a  reinforced  concrete 
foundation  with  concrete  block  wails  and  metal  roofs.  Decorative  features  were  lim¬ 
ited  to  whimsical  animals  on  glazed  brick  on  the  street-side  of  Building  776  [6.28] . 

Under  both  PCC  and  DoDDS  management,  schools  in  the  Canal  Zone  were  similar 
to  schools  in  the  United  States  in  terms  of  academics,  athletics,  and  extracurricular 
activities.  Soccer,  football,  baseball,  and  track  and  field  were  offered  as  after-school 
activities  at  all  levels  of  education. 

In  1992  two  relocatable  buildings  (Buildings  780  and  781) 
were  added  to  the  Curundu  Elementary  School  complex.  A 
third  (Building  782)  was  added  in  1993.  When  the  property 
was  transferred  to  the  Republic  of  Panama  in  1999,  its 
total  value  was  assessed  at  $1,569,091. 


6-28 


OLAZSD  BPtCU  COLOR  L£G£HD 

(ffiimn  -  Na.  ne 

-  rt/o,  J60 

-  A/e.  1&3 

f  ~j  -  jVe.  1/94  ’4  /3*/e.«  CC-&S,) 

; - ]  «.jv^/7-£-  ^y-«^<vosf; 


,oyc&  6  a/os*  -iV-'/rc; — 

/Vo.  - 

I  Ha.  3/S  - r 


4.0  Hfi/Cx  couftsrs  A*  JS  JO/tiTB 
ffa.  <194- ,  ' 


GLAZED  BPjCJj  WALL  PATT£PJ±  -  WgS7~  ELEVAT/ON  BLDG  B. 


[6.28]  Monkey  and  alligator  detail  for  glazed 
brick  wall,  Curundu  Elementary  School. 


I  thletic  and  Recreation  Facilities 

n  January  1947  the  Commanding  General,  Lieutenant  General  Willis  D.  Critten- 
jerger,  announced  changes  to  the  military  training  program  that  were  intended  to 
promote  a  higher  level  of  physical  conditioning.  Crittenberger’s  goal  was  to  create 
‘an  ambitious  sports  program  that  would  enable  every  individual  in  the  command 
to  participate  in  at  least  one  sport.”38  A  consequence  of  the  new  athletic  program 
was  the  construction  of  a  host  of  new  facilities,  but  these  were  intended  for  use  not 
only  by  active  duty  personnel,  but  by  their  families  as  well. 

Golf  Clubhouse.  The  first  undertaking  was  the  construction  of  a  golf  clubhouse 
(Building  167)  near  the  Miller  Field  grandstand  (Facility  48),  completed  21  Septem¬ 
ber  1949.  Built  on  a  concrete  foundation  with  concrete  flooring,  the  walls  of  the 
building  were  of  wood  and  prefabricated  metal  with  numerous  openings  for  ventila¬ 
tion.  The  roof  was  of  prefabricated  metal  and  tarpaper.  Originally  measuring  20  x  56 
ft,  two  16  x  31  ft  offsets  were  added  in  the  1950s  expanding  total  space  to  1386  sq  ft. 
In  1969,  a  pro  shop  and  club  storeroom  were  added  to  the  facility. 

By  February  1980,  the  golf  clubhouse  was  being  used  as  an 
officers'  club  annex. 

Swimming  Pool  Facility  452,  a  50-meter  Oiympic-size  swimming  pool  was  con¬ 
structed  in  April  1948  to  replace  the  original  pool  (Facility  55).  Similar  facilities  were 
constructed  at  Fort  Kobbe,  Fort  Davis,  and  Fort  Gulick.  The  concrete  swimming 
pool  complex  included  bathhouses  for  men  and  women,  a  children’s  wading  pool, 
a  spectators’  viewing  stand,  and  a  snack  bar.  The  floor  surrounding  the  pool  was 
made  of  terra  cotta  tile. 

The  swimming  pool  was  named  in  honor  of  Forrest  Estey  Williford,  Brigadier  Gen- 
eral,  U.S.  Army  [6.29] .  General  Williford  was  a  graduate  of  the  United  States  Military 


6-29 


[6.29]  Training  exercise  at  Williford  Swimming 
Pool. 


Academy  (Class  of  1906)  and  the  recipient  of  numerous  awards.  His  foreign  tours 
included  serving  various  positions  with  the  Harbor  Defenses  of  Balboa  at  Fort 
Amador  with  the  4th  Coast  Artillery  from  October  1936  to  October  1938.  General 
Williford  retired  from  active  duty  on  31  January  1944  and  died  on  17  March  1955.39 

Two  concrete  bohios  were  constructed  onsite  in  front  of 
the  pool  in  1979. 


Athletic  Court  for  the  Medical  Complex .  In  June  1950  an  athletic  court  (Facility 
524)  was  constructed  near  the  Sector  Hospital  barracks.  The  court  consisted  of  a 
concrete  slab  surrounded  by  poultry  wire  fencing. 


In  August  1991  the  athletic  court  was  converted  to  an  8- 
unit  air  conditioned  kennel  for  pets  of  guests  visiting 
Building  518  in  the  medical  complex. 

Gymnasium .  The  original  hangar  gymnasium  was  replaced  on  19  June  1951  with 
a  permanent  gymnasium  building  [6.30,  6.31].  The  new  facility,  Building  52, 
housed  19,288  sq  ft  and  accommodated  1800  spectators.  The  entire  building  was 
made  of  concrete  except  for  the  corrugated  metal  roof.  The  building,  which  mea¬ 
sured  140  x  122  ft,  was  taken  up  primarily  by  court  floor  space,  with  bleachers  on 
either  side.  The  partial  second  floor  measured  96  x  23  ft.  There  was  no  interior 
wall  to  the  second  floor  room,  only  security  screening  to  prevent  anyone  from 
falling  to  the  first  floor. 

In  December  1956  the  gymnasium  was  named  in  honor  of  Colonel  Russell  Potter 
Reeder,  Sr.  Although  Colonel  Reeder  was  trained  in  the  medical  field,  his  military 
career  was  as  a  soldier,  not  as  a  physician.  In  addition  to  serving  wartime  duty  dur¬ 
ing  both  the  Spanish-American  War  and  World  War  I,  Reeder  was  Commander  of 
the  Coast  Artillery  at  Fort  Sherman  in  the  1920s.40 


[6.30]  Detail  of  Reeder  Gymnasium,  Building  52. 


6-30 


Softball  Fields.  Several  softball  fields  and  grandstands  were  constructed  during 
this  era.  They  included  Jarman  Field,  Carnes  Field,  and  Johnston  Field. 

Jarman  Field.  A  337-seat  grandstand  (Facility  394)  and  softball  complex  was  con¬ 
structed  on  the  large  flat  expanse  of  grass  northeast  of  Building  129  in  March  1953 
[6.32].  Constructed  of  concrete  and  corrugated  aluminum  roofing,  the  facility 
changed  little  over  the  years.  The  softball  complex  included  the  main  softball  dia¬ 
mond  in  front  of  the  grandstand  plus  a  little  league  softball  diamond.  Both  dia¬ 
monds  had  two  dugouts,  a  scoreboard,  and  a  backstop.  A  press  box  was  added  to 
the  complex  in  1975,  and  night  lighting  was  added  in  1980. 


[6.31]  Soldiers  run  physical  training  in  Reeder 
Gymnasium,  Fort  Clayton. 


[6.32]  Jarman  Field  grandstands. 


6-31 


On  5  January  1957,  just  before  a  baseball  game  between  Fort  Amador  and  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton  baseball  teams,  a  ceremony  was  held  dedicating  the  field  in  honor  of  Major 
General  Sanderford  Jarman.  General  Jarman  had  served  in  the  Panama  Canal 
Department  from  1  November  1939  to  2  August  1941  as  Commanding  General,  Coast 
Artillery  Command.  General  Jarman,  a  graduate  of  the  United  States  Military  Acad¬ 
emy,  retired  from  military  service  in  1946  and  died  on  15  October  1954.41 

The  name  Jarman  Field  came  to  be  synonymous  with  the  entire  park  area,  which 
included  the  golf  course,  tennis  courts,  and  swimming  pool. 

The  final  element  of  Jarman  Field  was  a  jump  tower  (Facility 
173)  installed  across  the  street  from  the  Fort  Clayton 
Elementary  School  (Building  129)  in  the  1990s. 

Carnes  Softball  Field.  The  Carnes  Softball  Field  (Facility  224)  was  constructed 
immediately  west  of  Building  220  and  south  of  Building  201  in  September  1971.  The 
field  was  dedicated  to  Lieutenant  Colonel  Ambrus  Durward  Carnes  who  had  served 
a  tour  of  the  Panama  Canal  Zone  with  the  U.S.  Army,  and  who  was  the  recipient  of 
the  Silver  Star,  Bronze  Star,  Air  Medal,  Army  Commendation  Medal,  and  Combat 
Infantryman’s  Badge.  The  Carnes  Softball  Field  included  a  small  set  of  metal  bleach¬ 
ers,  a  scoreboard,  and  night  lighting.42 

Johnston  Softball  Field  Johnston  Softball  Field  (Facility  228)  was  constructed 
around  1971  immediately  in  front  of  Buildings  208  and  210.  The  facility  consisted  of  a 
softball  diamond,  bleachers,  and  a  small  storage  building.  The  field  was  dedicated  to 
the  memory  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Robert  Johnston,  U.S.  Army,  “for  his  devotion  to 
duty  and  furtherance  of  Operation  Friendship  through  athletic  events,  5  August  1961  .”43 

Enlisted  Men’s  Service  Club  (Valent  Recreation  Center ).  Groundbreaking  for 
Building  53,  a  new  enlisted  men’s  service  club,  was  held  at  Fort  Clayton  on  25  June 
1973.44  The  building,  located  on  the  former  site  of  the  original  post  gymnasium  and 
bowling  alley,  was  completed  on  5  May  1975.  The  concrete  building  was  designed 
with  central  air  conditioning,  and  enclosed  19,630  sq  ft  of  floor  space.  The  building 
measured  130  x  151  ft  and  was  completed  at  a  cost  of  about  $802,000.  As  originally 
designed  the  building  contained  reading  and  writing  rooms,  a  TV  room,  a  cards 
room,  six  music  rooms,  a  game  room,  a  lobby  and  information  area,  several  offices, 
a  kitchen,  lounge,  and  a  ballroom  with  stage.  The  center  was  dedicated  in  honor  of 
Othon  0.  Valent,  Command  Sergeant  Major,  U.S.  Army  Forces  Southern  Command 
(August  1969  to  May  1973).45 

Architecturally,  the  building  was  designed  to  reflect  the  Bellavistino  Style  of  Build¬ 
ing  39,  the  original  Enlisted  Men’s  Service  Club.  Both  entrances  of  Building  53 
included  arched  canopies  reflective  of  the  arches  typical  of  Bellavistino  architec¬ 
ture,  but  the  roof  was  a  executed  in  a  modified  mansard  style. 

A  Home  to  the  Force 

During  the  first  two  decades  after  World  War  II  Fort  Clayton  was  transformed  by 
global  nuclear  politics,  construction  technology  advances,  and  middle  class  aspira- 


6-32 


tions  into  an  American  community— a  company  town  whose  main  business,  as 
always,  was  to  guard  the  gates  between  two  oceans. 

Construction  programs  at  Fort  Clayton  during  this  period  provided  the  Army’s  new 
professional  soldier  a  home  with  all  the  amenities  of  a  typical  American  town:  a 
‘neighborhood’  school,  a  dispensary,  a  commissary,  a  PX  and  snack  bar,  social 
clubs  for  commissioned  officers  and  NCOs,  a  new  swimming  pool  and  gymnasium, 
a  bowling  alley,  golf  course,  two  theaters,  and  chapel.  Family  housing  included  144 
sets  of  officers’  quarters  and  869  sets  of  enlisted  men’s  quarters.  By  the  end  of  this 
period  the  available  housing  stock  at  Fort  Clayton  had  increased  even  more.46 

By  1977,  when  the  Panama  Canal  Treaties  were  signed,  Fort  Clayton  had  virtually 
assumed  its  final  form.  Due  to  the  impact  of  the  treaties,  Fort  Clayton’s  role  would 
change  markedly,  and  it  would  remain  vital  to  the  U.S.  military  until  the  very  end. 
The  next  20  years  would  bring  periods  of  tension,  conflict,  and  reconciliation 
between  the  Panamanian  government  and  the  U.S.  military.  And  Fort  Clayton  would 
be  at  the  center  of  momentous  events. 


Notes  for  Chapter  6 

1  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD , 
Vol.  4,  27. 

2  Martin  A.  Peters,  unpublished  memoir,  1998, 
152. 

3  Charles  Morris,  Security  and  Defense  of  the 
Panama  Canal:  1903-2000  (Balboa  Heights: 
Panama  Canal  Commission  Printing  Office, 
n.d.),  130. 

4  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the  PCD , 
Vol.  4,  36, 85-93;  James  C.  White,  “USARSO’s 
Anniversary,”  Southern  Command  News ,  2 
July  1970,  16;  Jon  P.  Speller,  The  Panama 
Canal:  Heart  of  America ’s  Security  (New 
York:  Robert  Speller  &  Sons,  Publishers,  Inc., 
1972),  136;  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  U.S.  Army 
Installations  in  Panama,  8. 

5  White,  “USARSO’s  Anniversary,”  Southern 
Command  News,  2  July  1970, 16.  The  U.S. 
Army  Inter-American  Geodetic  Survey  was 
an  effort  to  produce  an  extremely  accurate 
survey  of  the  region  through  the  use  of  trian¬ 
gulation. 

6  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  U.S.  Army  Installations 
in  Panama,  131. 

7  White,  “USARSO’s  Anniversary,”  Southern 
Command  News,  2  July  1970,  16;  De  Mena, 
The  Era  of  U.S.  Army  Installations  in  Panama, 
9, 133;  Morris,  Security  and  Defense  of  the 
Panama  Canal,  130. 


8  33rd  Infantry  Regimental  Combat  Team  Asso¬ 
ciation,  “A  Brief  History  of  the  33rd  Infantry 
Regiment,”  unpublished  manuscript,  n.d., 
2-3;  David  Clark,  interviewed  by  author,  28 
February  2000. 

9  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  U.S.  Army  Installations 
in  Panama,  132-133;  Tom  Scanlon,  Army 
Times  Guide  to  Army  Posts  (Harrisburg,  PA: 
The  Stackpole  Company,  1966),  357. 

10  Historical  Section,  Caribbean  Defense  Com¬ 
mand,  “Construction  &  Real  Estate  Activities 
in  the  Caribbean  Defense  Command” 
(Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Caribbean  Defense 
Command,  1946),  USARSO  History  Office 
files,  National  Archives  and  Records  Admin¬ 
istration,  College  Park,  MD,  69;  White,  “Ft. 
Clayton-A  History,”  20;  De  Mena,  The  Era  of 
U.S.  Army  Installations  in  Panama,  131-132. 

1 1  Morris,  Security  and  Defense  of  the  Panama 
Canal,  124-125, 127. 

12  Ibid.,  127,  Colonel  Elmer  M.  Regn,  ed.,  “Fort 
Clayton,  Canal  Zone:  Master  Plan  Analysis  of 
Existing  Facilities”  (Fort  Clayton,  CZ: 

USARSO  Command  Review  Board,  1972),  17; 
Paul  McDonald,  Jr.,  editor,  Schooling  in  the 
Panama  Canal  Zone  1904-1979  and  DODDS 
Panama- 1979- 1989  (Panama:  Phi  Delta 
Kappa,  Panama  Canal  Area,  1990),  14. 

13  Ivan  Klasovsky,  electronic  communication 
with  author,  3  March  2000. 

14  Stephen  P.  Moeller,  “Vigilant  and  Invincible,” 
ADA  Magazine ,  May-June  1995;  De  Mena, 


The  Era  of  US.  Army  Installations  in  Panama, 
78, 112. 

15  Stanley  Leon,  interview  by  authors,  8  Febru¬ 
ary  1995. 

16  Knapp  and  Knapp,  Red,  White,  and  Blue  Par¬ 
adise,  54,  60-61 ;  U.S.  Senate,  Background 
Documents  Relating  to  the  Panama  Canal, 
Committee  on  Foreign  Relations  (Washing¬ 
ton,  DC:  GPO,  1977),  1058;  Paul  Ryan,  The 
Panama  Controversy:  U.S.  Diplomacy  and 
Defense  Interests  (Stanford,  CA:  Hoover  Insti¬ 
tution  Press,  1977),  52;  McDonald,  Schooling 
in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone,  57, 83;  Speller, 
The  Panama  Canal:  Heart  of  America 's  Secu¬ 
rity,  136-139. 

17  Knapp  and  Knapp,  Red,  White,  and  Blue  Par¬ 
adise,  55. 

18  Ibid.,  McDonald,  Schooling  in  the  Panama 
Canal  Zone,  57-58,  83-84. 

19  Speller,  The  Panama  Canal:  Heart  of 
America’s  Security,  55;  McDonald,  Schooling 
in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone,  57-58. 

20  U.S.  Senate,  Chronology,  9-36;  U.S.  Senate, 
Defense,  Maintenance  and  Operation  of  the 
Panama  Canal,  Including  Administration  and 
Government  of  the  Canal  Zone— Hearings 
Before  the  Committee  on  Armed  Services 
(Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1978),  62-63,  83-84, 
139,  164-165, 258-259. 

21  William  C.  Baldwin,  “A  History  of  Army 
Peacetime  Housing”  (Fort  Belvoir,  VA:  Office 


6-33 


of  History,  Headquarters,  U.S.  Army  Corps  of 
Engineers,  1993),  11. 

22  Office  of  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense, 
Properties  and  Installations,  Criteria  for  Fam¬ 
ily  Housing  Under  Public  Law  765 ,  83rd  Con¬ 
gress,  GPO:  Washington,  DC,  January  1955. 

23  Klasovsky,  electronic  communication  with 
author,  22  February  2000. 

24  See  endnote  #13.  The  Federal  agency  respon¬ 
sible  for  construction  of  the  canal  also  pro¬ 
vided  for  the  building  needs. 

25  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  U.S.  Army  Installations 
in  Panama,  133;  Regn,  “Fort  Clayton, 

Panama,  Master  Plan  Analysis  of  Existing 
Facilities,”  5. 

26  “Southern  Command  Network  Comes  to 
End,”  Tropic  Times,  2  July  1999;  “Build  Own 
TV  Antenna  In  a  Night,”  Buccaneer,  25  May 
1956,  3. 

27  Klasovsky,  electronic  communication  with 
author,  11  February  2000. 

28  Wayne  Worthington,  electronic  communica¬ 
tion  with  author,  10  January  2000. 

29  Klasovsky,  electronic  communications  with 
author,  27-28  January,  9  February,  11  Febru¬ 
ary  2000. 

30  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  US.  Army  Installations 
in  Panama,  132. 


31  Baldwin,  “A  History  of  Army  Peacetime 
Housing,”  8;  Virge  Jenkins  Temme,  “  ‘For 
Want  of  a 

Home  ...’A  Historic  Context  for  Wherry  and 
Capehart  Military  Family  Housing” 
(Aberdeen  Proving  Ground,  MD:  United 
States  Army  Environmental  Center,  1998), 
21-23, 57-63. 

32  “First  Barracks  at  Clayton  Fall  Prey  to  Opera¬ 
tion  Demolition,”  The  Buccaneer,  1  Novem¬ 
ber  1957,5. 

33  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  US.  Army  Installations 
in  Panama,  132. 

34  Klasovsky,  electronic  communication  with 
author,  22  February  2000. 

35  Ibid. 

36  “Chapel  Center  Fort  Clayton  Dedication  Cer¬ 
emony”  (Fort  Clayton,  CZ:  n.p.,  9  May  1965); 
“Commemorative  Medallion  Celebrating  the 
End  of  an  Era,”  Tropic  Times,  29  October 
1999,  4. 

37  McDonald,  Schooling  in  the  Panama  Canal 
Zone,  17. 

38  AG  Historical  Branch,  Military  Personnel, 
94-95. 

39  Memorandum  from  Major  General  John  A. 
Klein,  USA,  The  Adjutant  General,  Office  of 
the  Adjutant  General  to  HQ,  United  States 
Army  Caribbean,  Fort  Amador,  CZ,  20  August 
1956,  USARSO  History  Office  files,  National 


Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

40  Memorandum  from  Adjutant  General  Army 
Records  Center  to  Commanding  General, 
Fort  Clayton,  14  November  1956;  USARSO 
History  Office  files,  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD; 
Memorandum  from  Wayne  F.  Brilliant,  First 
Lieutenant,  Assistant  Adjutant  General,  AGC 
to  Commanding  Officer,  HQ  Fort  Clayton,  9 
June  1969;  USARSO  History  Office  files, 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD;  Memorandum  from 
Dale  E.  Hruby,  Colonel,  General  Staff,  Acting 
Director  of  Enlisted  Personnel,  U.S.  Army  Mil¬ 
itary  Personnel  Center,  Department  of  the 
Army  to  Brigadier  General  Frederick  F. 
Woerner,  Jr.,  Commander,  193d  Infantry 
Brigade,  Fort  Clayton,  24  May  1984,  USARSO 
History  Office  files,  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

41  “Jarman  Field,  Fort  Clayton,  Panama”  (n.p., 
n.d.),  PCD  Historical  Section,  History  of  the 
PCD,  Vol.  4,  n.p. 

42  Memorial  marker  hand  inscribed  by  author. 

43  Ibid. 

44  Dolores  De  Mena,  “Fort  Clayton”  (Fort  Clay¬ 
ton,  Panama:  USARSO  History  Office,  1995),  9. 

45  Memorial  marker  transcribed  by  author. 

46  Scanlon,  Guide  to  Army  Posts,  357. 


6-34 


CHAPTER  7 


From  Treaty  to  Transfer  (1979- 1999) 

After  the  Treaty 

The  End  of  the  Canal  Zone 

The  Panama  Canal  Treaties  were  put  into  effect  1  October  1979,  also  known  as 
Treaty  Implementation  Day.  The  effects  were  far-reaching  and  touched  almost  every 
aspect  of  life  for  U.S.  citizens  living  in  the  Canal  Zone. 

The  most  immediate  and  conspicuous  impact  on  Americans  was  the  dissolution  of 
the  Panama  Canal  Zone  as  a  U.S.  political  jurisdiction:  the  strip  of  land  formerly 
known  as  the  Canal  Zone  reverted  to  the  Republic  of  Panama.  Both  the  Panama 
Canal  Company  and  the  Canal  Zone  Government  were  likewise  dissolved.  A  new 
controlling  authority  called  the  Panama  Canal  Commission  (PCC)  was  established. 

The  PCC  staff  was  a  mix  of  Americans  and  Panamanians,  but  over  the  next  20  years 
the  percentage  of  Panamanian  employees  increased  steadily  until  the  eve  of  the 
canal  transfer  to  Panama,  at  which  time  only  a  handful  of  U.S.  citizens  were  still 
involved  with  running  the  canal. 

Another  important  change  was  the  transfer  of  security  responsibilities  in  civilian 
areas  from  Canal  Zone  police  to  the  Guardia  Nacional  of  the  Republic  of  Panama— 
the  country’s  military  police. 

Immediate  Impacts  on  U.S.  Military  Bases 

Naturally,  the  treaty  also  signaled  dramatic  changes  for  U.S.  military  forces  in 
Panama.  On  Treaty  Implementation  Day,  most  U.S.  military  installations  were  redes¬ 
ignated  as  “Defense  Sites.”  It  was  agreed  that  these  sites  would  remain  under  the 
control  of  U.S.  forces  until  31  December  1999,  and  were  authorized  to  be  used  for 
defense  purposes.  The  Defense  Sites  specified  by  the  treaty  were  Fort  Clayton 
(including  Corozal),  Fort  Davis,  Fort  Sherman,  Fort  Kobbe/Howard  Air  Force  Base, 

U.S.  Naval  Station  Rodman,  Marine  Barracks,  Albrook  Air  Force  Station,  plus  several 
depot  and  communication  sites.  Other  installations  were  redesignated  as  “Military 
Areas  of  Coordination,”  with  both  nations  sharing  security  responsibilities  and  some 
uses.  This  arrangement  allowed  partial  transfer  of  facilities  to  the  Republic  of  Panama 
while  continuing  to  help  meet  the  housing,  communications,  training,  and  support 
needs  of  U.S.  troops  stationed  there.  The  Military  Areas  of  Coordination  included 
Quarry  Heights,  Fort  Amador,  Fort  Gulick,  the  Curundu  Army  housing  area,  the  U.S. 
Naval  Station  Amador,  and  various  miscellaneous  facilities.  The  schools,  hospitals, 
and  commissaries  previously  run  by  the  Panama  Canal  Company  were  transferred  to 
DoD:  Gorgas  Hospital  became  the  property  of  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Corps  and  the 
schools  became  part  of  the  DoDDS  system.  As  final  transfer  approached,  school 
enrollment  steadily  decreased  as  the  number  of  Americans  on  the  PCC  payroll 
declined,  troop  reductions  continued,  and  the  political  situation  in  Panama  worked 


7-1 


through  instabilities.  Nevertheless,  DoD  continued  to  provide  schooling  for  U.S.  mili¬ 
tary  dependents  through  spring  1999.1 

In  addition  to  the  basic  changes  in  the  designation  of  U.S.  military  installations, 
treaty  implementation  required  that  many  activities  and  units  be  relocated.  Most  of 
these  relocations  impacted  Fort  Clayton,  which  was  the  only  remaining  Army 
Defense  Site  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Pacific  side  of  the  Panama  Canal.  For  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton,  the  period  between  treaty  signing  and  implementation  was  a  time  of  intensive 
planning.  Fort  Amador  had  housed  the  Army  headquarters  in  Panama,  but  treaty 
compliance  required  U.S.  authorities  to  turn  over  the  facilities  at  Fort  Amador  that 
had  housed  the  headquarters.  As  Panama’s  Defense  and  Security  Commission 
moved  in,  along  with  elements  of  the  Guardia  Nacional,  Army  headquarters  activi¬ 
ties  had  to  move  out.  These  activities  were  transferred  to  Fort  Clayton,  which  was 
renamed  Headquarters,  193rd  Infantry  Brigade  (Panama)  in  anticipation  of  the  dis¬ 
solution  of  the  Canal  Zone.  This  transfer  brought  the  relocation  of  Headquarters 
and  Headquarters  Company  and  the  470th  Military  Intelligence  Group  from  Fort 
Amador  to  Fort  Clayton  in  September  1979.  Major  units  of  the  193rd  Infantry  Brigade 
(Panama)  already  located  at  Fort  Clayton  at  that  time  were  the  4th  Battalion  (Mecha¬ 
nized),  20th  Infantry;  193rd  Combat  Support  Battalion,  including  the  475th  Transporta¬ 
tion  Company  (Light-Medium  Truck),  the  193rd  Military  Intelligence  Company,  and 
the  396th  Signal  Company;  Headquarters  Command,  including  Headquarters  and 
Headquarters  Company,  601st  Medical  Company,  and  79th  U.S.  Army  Band;  the  534th 
Military  Police  Company  and  Headquarters  Company;  and  the  Defense  Mapping 
Agency,  Inter-American  and  Geodetic  Survey. 

Little  new  construction  was  required  for  these  activity  realignments,  but  some  build¬ 
ing  modifications  were  necessary  to  adapt  existing  structures  to  the  requirements  of 
the  new  activities  they  housed.  Specifically,  a  coordinated  series  of  building  alter¬ 
ations  was  executed  in  two  phases.2 

In  general  terms,  the  greatest  impact  of  treaty  implementation  on  the  Fort  Clayton 
built  environment  was  to  eliminate  any  and  all  reasons  for  future  installation  expan¬ 
sion  or  significant  new  construction  programs  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.S. 
Department  of  Defense. 

1986  Command  Structure  Reorganization 

A  reorganization  on  4  December  1986  reactivated  the  United  States  Army  South 
(USARSO)  as  a  major  Army  command  and  the  Army  component  of  the  United 
States  Southern  Command.  Fort  Clayton  was  chosen  to  house  the  headquarters  for 
the  new  command,  and  the  renamed  193rd  Infantry  Brigade  (Light)  was  made  a  sub¬ 
ordinate  command  of  USARSO.  The  new  major  command  was  headquartered  in 
Building  95,  the  original  2nd  Field  Artillery  battalion  barracks  built  in  1933.  By  the 
late  1980s,  Fort  Clayton  hosted  the  largest  group  of  Army  facilities  in  the  Republic  of 
Panama.  Other  units  headquartered  or  based  at  Fort  Clayton  by  1989  included  the 
128th  Aviation  Brigade  (Provisional),  the  Military  Police  Command  (Theater)  (Provi¬ 
sional),  Community  Operations  Agency/U.S.  Army  Garrison,  1109th  U.S.  Army  Signal 
Brigade,  U.S.  Army  Security  Assistance  Agency  Latin  America,  and  the  Southern 


7-2 


Command  Network  (Radio/TV).  By  1995,  these  units  had  been  joined  by  the  59th 
Engineer  Company,  3rd  Special  Operations  Support  Command  (Airborne),  154th  Sig¬ 
nal  Battalion,  and  536th  Engineer  Battalion 3 

New  Missions  After  the  Cold  War 

Security,  Training,  and  Humanitarian  Operations 

During  this  period  the  emphasis  on  defense  of  the  Panama  Canal  remained  pri¬ 
mary.  At  the  same  time,  however,  as  the  U.S.  government  sought  to  support  democ¬ 
racy  throughout  the  hemisphere,  Central  and  South  American  countries  became 
higher  priorities  in  U.S.  international  relations.  A  related  development,  which  was 
also  spurred  by  domestic  public  opinion  during  these  decades,  saw  the  U.S.  gov¬ 
ernment  begin  to  enlist  the  services  of  DoD  to  fight  the  export  of  illegal  drugs  into 
the  United  States  from  regions  south  of  the  border.  These  trends  combined  to  cre¬ 
ate  new  secondary  missions  for  USSOUTHCOM.  Specific  activities  of  USSOUTH- 
COM  included  support  of  U.S.  Security  Assistance  Programs  in  Latin  America; 
planning  and  executing  disaster  relief  operations;  conducting  search  and  rescue 
operations;  and  support  of  combined  inter-American  training  exercises.4 

USARSO’s  geographic  area  of  responsibility  included  19  Latin  American  countries. 
Under  USARSO,  the  193rd  Infantry  Brigade  was  tasked  to  defend  the  Panama  Canal, 
increase  the  capability  and  professionalism  of  Latin  American  armies,  train  U.S. 
Infantry  battalions  in  jungle  operations,  provide  training  support  for  partnership 
units,  and  support  U.S.  Southern  Command  contingency  missions.5 


Training  for  New  Missions 


The  average  daily  USARSO  troop  strength  in  the  mid-1990s  was  6000  personnel.  In 
order  to  implement  its  missions,  USARSO  conducted  training  exercises  both  for 
Canal  defense  and  for  Latin  American  support.  These  exercises  were  conducted 
throughout  Panama  and  Latin  America;  they  involved 
active  duty  and  reserve  troops  as  well  as  personnel 
from  partnering  countries.  In  addition  to  standard 
combat  training,  USARSO  conducted  exercises  to  pre¬ 
pare  troops  for  drug  interdiction  efforts  and  humani¬ 
tarian  operations.  This  latter  mission  included 
disaster  relief  operations  and  construction  projects  to 
modernize  public  infrastructure  throughout  the 
region  [7.01].  Starting  in  1994  USSOUTHCOM  con¬ 
ducted  Operation  Safe  Haven  to  relieve  overcrowding 
in  camps  set  up  at  Guantanamo  Naval  Base,  Cuba,  to 
house  refugees  who  had  been  attempting  to  flee  Cuba 
by  sea.  Under  Operation  Safe  Haven  camps  for  nearly 
9000  Cuban  emigrants  were  established  in  Panama.6 


[7.01]  A  soldier  talks  with  a  mother  and  her  chil¬ 
dren  during  a  disaster  relief  operation  in  Bolivia. 


In  addition  to  carrying  out  their  official  duties,  many 
personnel  from  Fort  Clayton  took  part  in  assistance 
programs  specifically  for  the  people  of  Panama.  Civic 


7-3 


[7.02]  Flag-waving  Kuna  Indians  from  the  San 
Bias  islands  welcome  U.S.  Army  solders  to  their 
village. 


action  operations  were  as  meaningful  to  those  providing  assistance  as  they  were  to 
those  receiving  the  aid  [7.02].  Individual  units,  wanting  to  share  their  gifts,  began 
‘adopting1  Panamanian  communities  through  the  Christmas  Sponsorship  Program. 

Fort  Clayton  and  Operation  Just  Cause 

A  Dictatorship  is  Born 

Political  developments  in  the  Republic  of  Panama  during  the  1980s  created 
increasingly  intolerable  conditions  that  ultimately  required  international  interven¬ 
tion  on  behalf  of  the  Panamanian  people.  As  events  finally  came  to  a  head  in 
December  1989  USARSO  found  its  traditional  and  new  missions  converging  in  a 
military  action  that  would  free  the  citizens  of  Panama  from  the  human  rights 
abuses  and  criminal  activities  of  General  Manuel  Antonio  Noriega,  military  strong¬ 
man  and  de  facto  ruler  of  the  increasingly  beleaguered  Central  American  nation. 
Thanks  in  large  part  to  the  extensive  training  carried  out  in  support  of  USARSO’s 
post-implementation  missions,  Operation  Just  Cause  quickly  set  the  stage  for  the 
restoration  of  democratic  government  in  Panama— and  Fort  Clayton  was  at  the  cen¬ 
ter  of  the  action. 

Tensions  between  the  United  States  and  the  Noriega  government  had  been  building 
for  years.  Originally  supported  by  the  U.S.  for  assistance  with  counter-drug  opera¬ 
tions,  Noriega’s  excesses  and  political  abuses  soon  alienated  him  from  his  Ameri¬ 
can  supporters.  Noriega  had  been  strengthening  his  position  through  the 
increasingly  militarized  Guardia  Nacional,  which  he  had  restructured  and  renamed 
the  Fuerzas  de  Defensa  de  Panama  (Panama  Defense  Forces  or  PDF)  in  1983. 
Under  his  control  during  the  1980s  the  PDF  expanded  rapidly  to  a  strength  of 
16,000.  Also  during  this  time,  anti-Noriega  protests  by  Panamanian  citizens 
increased  and  an  opposition  political  party  was  formed. 


The  two  major  coalition  political  parties  met  head-on  in  the  1984  presidential  elec¬ 
tion.  The  National  Democratic  Union,  Noriega’s  party,  presented  banker  Nicolas 
Ardito  Barletta  as  its  candidate.  The  Democratic  Opposition  Alliance  supported  the 
candidacy  of  former  President  Arnulfo  Arias.  After  a  delay  of  several  days  the  gov¬ 
ernment  declared  Barletta  the  victor,  and  the  opposition  responded  with  accusa¬ 
tions  of  massive  election  fraud.  The  ongoing  protests  increased  in  strength  when 
President  Barletta  sought  to  impose  austerity  measures,  and  support  for  him  soon 
began  to  dissolve  as  financial  problems  loomed  and  political  oppression  intensi¬ 
fied.  Finally,  on  28  September  1985,  Barletta  resigned  his  office,  but  political  unrest 
continued.  Serving  to  destabilize  the  situation  further,  a  PDF  officer  stepped  for¬ 
ward  to  confirm  allegations  that  Noriega  was  involved  in  large-scale  money  launder¬ 
ing  and  drug  trafficking  activities.  This  revelation  sparked  riots,  and  the  streets  were 
flooded  with  Panamanians  from  all  walks  of  life  demanding  that  Noriega  step  down. 
By  the  end  of  1987,  U.S.  policymakers  agreed.7 

Noriega  was  indicted  on  drug-related  charges  in  February  1988  by  grand  juries  in 
Miami  and  Tampa,  FL.  In  order  to  put  pressure  on  the  Noriega  regime  the  U.S.  sus¬ 
pended  all  military  and  economic  assistance  payments  to  the  Panamanian  govern¬ 
ment.  Noriega’s  government  responded  to  the  rising  tide  of  protest  by  shutting 
down  opposition  media  outlets.  To  augment  the  PDF  Noriega  created  his  so-called 
“Dignity  Battalions”— hired  muscle  organized  as  civilian  paramilitary  terror  squads. 
Rival  PDF  officers  attempted  a  coup  in  March  1988,  but  Noriega  survived.  Unrest 
continued  but  organized  opposition  seemed  to  have  been  thwarted. 

The  United  States  Draws  the  Line 

Even  though  Noriega  had  his  hands  full  with  domestic  strife,  by  1988  he  seemed 
determined  to  pick  a  fight  with  the  United  States  as  well.  He  deliberately  provoked 
the  United  States  during  this  period  by  condoning  the  harassment  of  Americans  in 
Panama,  distributing  anti-U.S.  propaganda,  and  even  supporting  incursions  into  U.S. 
military  installations. 

In  the  presidential  election  of  7  May  1989  opposition  candidates  won  the  popular 
vote,  but  Noriega’s  government  annulled  the  results  claiming  that  they  were  tainted 
by  election-related  violence  and  foreign  influence.  The  inevitable  outburst  of  new 
protest  was  met  in  the  streets  with  government  violence,  and  opposition  candidates 
were  severely  beaten  by  the  Dignity  Battalions.  As  the  harassment  of  U.S.  diplomats 
and  military  personnel  continued,  the  United  States  denounced  Noriega’s  annul¬ 
ment  of  the  election  results  and  called  for  his  overthrow.8 

In  addition  to  the  official  pressure  applied  to  Noriega  and  his  government,  U.S.  politi¬ 
cal  and  military  leaders  were  taking  practical  steps  to  address  the  growing  turmoil 
created  by  Noriega.  As  harassment  of  U.S.  personnel  increased  in  late  1988,  DoD  and 
the  State  Department  began  reducing  the  number  of  military  dependents  and  civilian 
diplomats  in  Panama.  President  Bush  recalled  the  American  Ambassador  and 
ordered  diplomatic  dependents  to  move  onto  military  installations.  Contingency  plan¬ 
ning  for  a  possible  military  confrontation  began  in  February  1988,  and  a  month  later 
U.S.  forces  were  sent  to  provide  additional  security  at  U.S.  installations  in  Panama— the 


7-5 


first  of  four  such  deployments.  Joint  Task  Force-Panama  was  activated  on  9  April  1989 
to  coordinate  the  planning.  After  the  election  fiasco  in  May  1989  President  George 
Bush  ordered  1900  additional  combat  troops  to  Panama.  This  augmentation,  code- 
named  Operation  Nimrod  Dancer,  began  on  11  May  1989  and  continued  into  June.  On 
22  May  Operation  Blade  Jewel  accelerated  the  relocation  of  all  U.S.  personnel  and 
their  dependents  to  Defense  Sites  or  Military  Areas  of  Coordination.  Contingency 
planning  for  military  operations  intensified  during  the  summer,  and  the  U.S.  began 
conducting  joint  training/freedom  of  movement  exercises  (codenamed  Sand  Fleas 
and  Purple  Storms ),  often  in  close  proximity  to  PDF  forces.  General  Maxwell  R.  Thur¬ 
man  was  sworn  in  as  USSSOUTHCOM  Commander  in  Chief  on  30  September  1989.9 

On  3  October  1989  a  second  coup  failed  to  oust  Noriega,  and  it  became  clear  to  the 
Bush  administration  that  the  Panamanians  would  need  international  help  to  remove 
him  from  power.  Plans  were  set  into  motion  for  the  removal  of  Noriega  and  neutral¬ 
ization  of  the  PDF  through  an  intervention  of  overwhelming  military  force. 

On  15  December  1989  Noriega  declared  Panama  to  be  at  war  with  the  United  States 
and  threatened  the  lives  of  the  35,000  U.S.  citizens  in  Panama.  The  final  provocation 
came  the  next  evening.  When  four  unarmed  U.S.  servicemen  lost  their  way  while  dri¬ 
ving  in  downtown  Panama  City  they  were  detained  at  a  roadblock  in  front  of  PDF  head¬ 
quarters  in  the  neighborhood  of  Chorrillo.  As  the  driver  turned  the  car  and  fled,  PDF 
troops  fired  on  the  vehicle,  killing  one  of  the  occupants.  A  Navy  lieutenant  and  his  wife 
who  witnessed  the  incident  were  detained  and  assaulted  by  the  PDF.  On  the  following 
day,  17  December  1989,  President  Bush  ordered  the  initiation  of  Operation  Just  Cause.10 

Liberating  Panama 

Operation  Just  Cause  had  four  objectives:  (1)  depose  and  capture  General  Noriega, 
(2)  protect  American  citizens,  (3)  keep  the  Panama  Canal  operating  safely,  and  (4) 
restore  the  nation  to  democracy.  On  19  December  troops  were  alerted,  marshaled, 
and  launched;  the  actual  military  operation  began  at  0100  hours  on  20  December. 
The  forces  utilized  included  troops  from  the  7th  Infantry  Division,  82nd  Airborne  Divi¬ 
sion,  the  5th  Mechanized  Division,  U.S.  Marines,  Rangers,  Sea-Air-Land  (SEALS), 
Special  Forces,  and  USARSO’s  193rd  Infantry  Brigade  (Light).  Support  was  provided 
by  the  830th  Air  Division,  the  24th  Composite  Wing  from  Howard  AFB,  the  USARSO 
41st  Area  Support  Group,  and  the  1109th  Signal  Brigade.  In  total,  more  than  27,000 
military  personnel  were  involved.  The  plan  called  for  multiple  simultaneous 
assaults  to  seize  and  secure  the  international  airport,  the  PDF  garrison  at  Fort 
Amador,  the  PDF  headquarters  (Comandancia)  in  Chorrillo,  the  Bridge  of  the 
Americas  over  the  canal  at  the  Pacific  entrance,  Balboa  Harbor,  and  Paitilla  Airport 
in  Panama  City.  Atlantic-side  forces  were  to  isolate  the  city  of  Colon  and  neutralize 
PDF  forces  at  Coco  Solo  and  Rio  Hato.  The  Special  Forces  were  tasked  with  recon¬ 
naissance  and  surveillance  missions  at  more  remote  locations,  securing  communi¬ 
cation  sites,  and  the  rescue  of  any  American  hostages.11 

The  events  of  20  December  went  mostly  according  to  the  plan.  Targets  were 
secured  but  resistance  was  met,  particularly  in  the  PDF  strongholds  at  Fort  Amador 
and  in  the  Chorrillo  area.  Every  tactical  objective  of  the  operation  was  successfully 


7-6 


“Humvees  from  the  5th  Battalion,  87th  Infantry  and  the  519th  Mili¬ 
tary  Police  Battalion  sped  out  the  front  gate  of  Fort  Clayton  across 
the  narrow  tracks  of  the  Panama  railway,  and  snaked  along  the 
narrow,  twisting  road  to  the  raised  embankment  of  the  Miraflores 
Locks.  The  lightly  armed  Panama  Canal  Commission  security 
guards  made  no  attempt  to  resist  the  American  combat  troops . . , 
Manuel  Noriega  had  vowed  to  sabotage  the  Canal,  should 
America  intervene  militarily.  But  if  the  PDF  intended  to  strike  the 
vital  Miraflores  Locks,  they  would  have  to  fight  their  way  through 
Claymore  mines  and  interlocking  machine-gun  fire  to  do  so.” 13 


achieved  by  sunset  on  20  December.  Canal  operation  was  suspended  for  only  30 
hours.  True  to  their  longtime  mission  of  canal  defense,  one  of  the  first  actions  for 
troops  guarding  Fort  Clayton  involved  Miraflores  Locks.12 

During  the  next  several  days,  U.S.  forces  swept  the  city  for  remaining  PDF  and  Dig¬ 
nity  Battalion  forces.  Little  organized  resistance  was  met.  Once  the  city  was 
secured,  U.S.  forces  fanned  out  into  the  countryside,  accepting  the  surrender  of 
PDF  forces  in  various  Panamanian  towns.  In  Panama  City,  within  hours  of  the  first 
military  action,  waves  of  refugees  began  fleeing  the  fighting  and  the  destruction 
around  the  Chorrillo  neighborhood.  The  Balboa  High  School  stadium  became  a 
makeshift  refugee  camp  until  a  better-equipped  displaced  persons  camp  was  set  up 
at  Albrook  Air  Force  Station. 

Noriega,  who  had  dropped  out  of  sight  during  the  first  assault,  surfaced  on  Christ¬ 
mas  Eve  at  the  Papal  Nunciature,  the  Vatican’s  Embassy,  seeking  asylum.  On  3  Janu¬ 
ary  1990,  however,  he  left  the  embassy  and  was  immediately  detained  by  U.S.  forces 
and  flown  to  Miami  for  arraignment.  Clean-up  operations  followed,  and  Operation 
Just  Cause  was  officially  ended  on  31  January  1990.  The  next  day,  Operation  Pro¬ 
mote  Liberty  was  launched  to  help  reestablish  a  democratic  government  in  Panama, 
resuscitate  the  economy,  and  provide  other  nation-building  services.14 

Fort  Clayton  in  the  Thick  of  Things 

Fort  Clayton  played  two  key  roles  in  Operation  Just  Cause.  First  of  all,  the  193rd 
Infantry  Brigade  (Light),  designated  Task  Force  Bayonet,  was  given  the  objective  “to 
seize  and  secure  the  Curundu-Ancon-Balboa  areas  by  ground  attack  and  to  conduct 
an  air  assault  to  secure  Fort  Amador  and  neutralize  the  PDF’s  5th  Company  gar¬ 
risoned  there.”10  An  attached  mechanized  infantry  battalion  task  force  was  to  isolate 
the  Comandancia.  Additionally,  the  task  force  was  to  seize  and  secure  various  PDF 
sites  around  the  area.  Units  from  Task  Force  Bayonet  attacked  from  both  the  front 
and  rear  gates  of  Fort  Clayton,  with  troops  proceeding  into  Balboa  and  others  to 


7-7 


Curundu.  At  the  same  time  Task  Force  Bayonet  members  began  the  air  assault  on 
Fort  Amador  and  the  ground  attack  on  the  Comandancia.  Task  Force  Bayonet  suc¬ 
cessfully  completed  all  its  missions  before  the  day  was  out.16  Fort  Clayton  itself  went 
virtually  unscathed  in  the  fighting.  Early  on  the  morning  of  20  December  mortar 
rounds  crashed  to  earth  inside  the  post.  Seeing  the  smoke,  soldiers  ran  toward  the 
motor  pool  hoping  that  no  one  had  been  hit.  To  their  relief,  the  only  victim  of  the 
mortar  volley  was  a  five-ton  truck.17 

Secondly,  headquarters  for  the  entire  operation  were  located  at  USARSO  headquar¬ 
ters,  Building  95  at  Fort  Clayton.  Joint  Task  Force-Panama  became  Joint  Task 
Force-South  for  the  operation.  USARSO  facilities  and  staff,  both  military  and  civilian, 
were  utilized  in  the  planning,  preparation,  and  execution  of  Operation  Just  Cause. 

Finally,  Fort  Clayton  hosted  a  historic  political  event  as  the  operation  got  underway. 
Panamanian  President-Elect  Guillermo  Endara  and  Vice  Presidents  Ricardo  Arias 
Calderon  and  Guillermo  Ford  were  escorted  to  Fort  Clayton  where  their  oaths  of  office 
were  administered  by  the  President  of  the  Panamanian  Human  Rights  Committee.18 

Post-Treaty  Construction  Projects 

Utility  Maintenance  and  Upgrades 

With  20  years  between  treaty  implementation  and  conclusion,  utility  maintenance 
and  upgrades  could  not  be  ignored.  In  1986  plans  were  developed  to  upgrade  the 
electrical  system  on  Fort  Clayton  and  other  Pacific-area  posts.  At  Fort  Clayton  the 
improvements  were  targeted  at  the  family  housing  areas  northeast  of  the  main  post. 
The  upgrades  continued  through  1990  with  replacement  of  the  primary  cables  in  the 
200  barracks  area  and  the  installation  of  new  street  lighting  in  the  1000  housing  area. 

Residential  Construction 

The  FY  1975  MCA  project  was  the  last  housing  constructed  at  Fort  Clayton.  (See 
chart  on  facing  page  for  a  summary  of  all  housing  types  constructed  throughout 
Fort  Clayton’s  history,  eras  of  origin,  etc.)  In  addition  to  helping  eliminate  the 
decades-long  military  housing  deficit  these  quarters  were  needed  to  improve  the 
quality  of  housing  stock  for  the  all-volunteer  Army.  Plans  were  drawn  up  in  1977  and 
construction  was  completed  in  1979.  Contractor  for  the  project  was  Wilson  and  Sav¬ 
age,  Inc.,  of  Memphis,  Tennessee.  Two  building  configurations  were  designed:  a 
four-bedroom,  two-family  type  and  a  two-bedroom,  four-family  type.  Construction 
costs  for  each  type  of  building  were  $106,344  and  $136,206,  respectively.  The  200 
housing  units  under  this  program  were  constructed  in  two  discrete  areas.  One 
group  (900  area)  was  located  in  the  corner  created  by  the  intersection  of  Muir  and 
Hospital  Roads,  across  from  Officers’  Row.  This  land  was  at  the  edge  of  the  original 
fill  and  lower  than  the  surrounding  area,  so  a  large  amount  of  grading  and  con¬ 
trolled  drainage  was  necessary.  The  80  quarters  were  mostly  concentrated  around  a 
looping  street.  The  second  group  (1100  area)  was  placed  along  Clayton-AIbrook 
Road  across  from  the  officer  and  civilian  housing  area  built  in  1969.  The  land  was 
lightly  terraced  for  the  120  quarters,  which  were  constructed  along  three  streets. 
Fully  equipped  playgrounds  were  provided  for  the  housing  areas. 


7-8 


Summary  of  Housing  Types  Constructed  on  Fort  Clayton,  1920-1999. 


Quarters  Type 

Year 

Drawing  Number(s) 

Building  Number(s) 

CO  (2F3) 

1920 

4273 

24,  6*8, 12-17 

CO  (4F3) 

1920 

4915 

1,  9-11, 18-19 

NCO  (4F2) 

1920 

5036 

20 

NCO  (4F2) 

1920 

7851 

802-803,  805,  807,  814815 

CO  (1F5) 

1922 

4990 

5 

FO  (1F3J 

1933 

4215 

7285 

NCO  (4F2) 

1933 

4216 

800-801 

FO  (1F3) 

1935 

4220 

86-87 

BOQ  {24  Apts) 

1936 

4644 

400 

FO  (1F3) 

1940 

$K  1561 

88-92 

FOType  4  (1F4) 

1942 

625-6315 

426,  430434 

NCO  (2F3) 

1942 

625-5570 

307 

NCO  Type  4  (1F2) 

1942 

625-5560 

308 

CO  Type  6  (2F3) 

194243 

625-5570 

401414,  416417,  419424,  427428,  506-511 

NCO  Type  3  (2F2) 

194243 

625-5550 

301-306,  309-316,  318-323,  325-340,  501-505 

C0Type4  (1F3) 

1943 

625-9445 

515 

FOType  5  (1F4) 

1943 

625-6315 

512-514,  516-517 

Guest  House  (40  Apts) 

1943 

5135 

518 

NCO  (2F3) 

194849 

4643 

350-385 

NCO  (2F3) 

1960 

25-23-01  (Sht70) 

470-481, 804,  806, 808813, 816841,  843, 850867 

BOQ  (8B1) 

1964 

25-23-06  (Sht  28)  5123-2 

157,  500 

NCO  (4F2) 

1964-65 

25-23-04  (Shts  77/78) 

531,  541,  551,  603-604,  611,  617,  631,  654,  656, 

NCO  (4F3) 

1964-65 

25-23-04  (Shts  77/78) 

677 

531-540,  542-549,  552-555,  557-561,  600-602, 

NCO  (4F4) 

1964-65 

25-23-04  (Shts  81/82) 

605-606,  608610, 612-615,  618629,  632-639,  641- 
650,  652-653,  655,  657-659,  661874,  676,  678 
685,  687891 

550,  556,  607,  616,  630, 640, 651, 660,  675, 686 

FO  (2F3)  (3FG2) 

1965 

25-23-05  (Shts  124/125)  5123-1 

23,  26, 460,  464 

FO  (2F4)  (4FG2) 

1965 

25-04-05  (Shts  128/129)  5123-1 

22,  24-25, 461463 

CG&WO  (2F4)  (C4A2) 

1969 

25-23-10  (Shts  123/124) 

1012-1013, 1049, 1051 

CG&WO  (4F2)  (EC2D4) 

1969 

25-23-10  (Shts  106/107) 

1000, 1002, 10081007, 1009-1010 

CG&WO  (4F4)  (C4A4) 

1969 

25-23-10  (Shts  123/124) 

1001, 1003, 1050, 10581060 

CG&WO  (6F2)  (EC2D6S) 

1969 

25-23-10  (Shts  106/107) 

1005 

LC&MAJ  (2F3)  (F3B2) 

1969 

25-23-10  (Shts  126/127) 

10281033, 1042, 1047-1048, 1062 

LC&MAJ  (2F4)  (F4A2) 

1969 

25-23-10  (Sht  132) 

1041, 1043, 1061 

NCO  (2F4)  (E4A2) 

1969 

25-23-10  (Shts  115/116) 

700, 708704,  706, 717, 720, 722, 1055, 1057 

NCO  (4F2)(EC2D4) 

1969 

25-23-10  (Shts  106/107) 

573-575,  577-578,  580-581,  701-702,  705,  708 

709,  716,  718-719,  721,  723-726 

NCO  (4F3)  (E3A4) 

1969 

25-23-10  (Shts  113/114) 

1052, 1056 

NCO  (4F4)  (E4A4) 

1969 

25-23-10  (Shts  115/116) 

570-572,  579,  707, 715, 1053-1054 

NCO  (4F2) 

1978 

25-18-03 

917,  919-920,  922-923,  925-926,  928929,  931- 

NCO  (2F4) 

1978-79 

25-18-03 

932,  934, 1100,  1102-1103,  11081106,  1109, 1111- 
1113, 11181116, 1118, 1120-1122, 1138 

900-901,  903-904,  908907,  918912,  914-916,  938 

937,  939,  1124-1125,  1128,  1131,  1133-1134,  1137, 
1140-1141,  1143,  1146,  1148,  1152-1153,  1155, 
1157, 1159, 1161-1162, 1164-1166, 1168-1169, 1172- 
1174, 1176, 1178, 1180 

Notes:  CG&WO  =  Company  Grade  &  Warrant  Officer;  LC&MAJ  =  Lieutenant  Colonel  &  Major;  Sht(s)  =  Sheets 

7-9 


These  quarters  were  built  on  a  reinforced  concrete  foundation,  with  walls  of  wood 
studs  and  gypsum  board.  This  bill  of  materials  was  significant  in  that  it  was  the  first 
time  family  housing  on  Fort  Clayton  was  not  made  of  concrete  block.  The  roofing 
material  was  steel  coated  with  baked  enamel.  The  exterior  finish  for  the  first  floor 
was  stucco,  and  for  the  second  floor  was  either  horizontal  or  vertical  siding.  Some 
units  had  stucco  panels  under  the  second-story  windows.  All  units  had  single-hung 
aluminum  windows. 

The  four-family,  two-bedroom  buildings  had  a  central  carport  with  capacity  for  four 
cars  [7.03].  Access  to  the  apartments  was  provided  by  a  central  staircase  open  on 
both  floors.  The  apartments  were  on  one  level,  with  two  complete  sets  on  each 
floor.  On  the  first  floor,  the  center  rear,  behind  the  staircase,  held  a  row  of  storage 
rooms.  On  the  second  floor  this  area  was  an  open  platform  with  a  safety  railing.  The 
apartments  were  entered  from  a  short  hallway  running  perpendicular  to  the  stair¬ 
way.  A  foyer  led  to  an  open  living  room/dining  room  that  ran  from  front  to  back 
through  the  apartment.  Across  this  area  was  a  hallway  with  bedrooms  at  each  out¬ 
side  corner  and  a  central  bath.  A  sliding  glass  door  led  from  the  living  room  to  a 
patio  with  privacy  screens.  On  the  second  floor,  the  patios  became  decks  with  rail¬ 
ings,  and  the  main  building  roof  continued  over  the  deck. 

The  two-family,  four-bedroom  buildings  had  individual  carports  at  the  sides  of  the 
building.  Entry  was  through  the  carport  to  a  utility  room,  or  through  the  front  door 
into  a  foyer.  A  storage  room,  half  bath,  and  the  utility  room  ran  along  the  outer  wall, 
with  a  staircase  to  the  right.  The  kitchen  was  toward  the  rear  of  the  unit.  The  right 
half  of  the  unit  consisted  of  a  living  room/dining  room  with  a  sliding  glass  door  to 
the  patio.  Upstairs  were  bedrooms  in  each  corner.  The  master  bedroom  (rear  out¬ 
side)  had  an  attached  full  bath.  Another  full  bath  was  located  in  the  center  of  the 
outside  wall.  The  patios  were  covered  by  the  same  baked  enamel  steel  roofing. 

Several  other  changes  during  this  period  affected  large  groups  of  family  housing. 
Starting  in  the  early  1980s  and  continuing  for  most  of  the  decade,  rising  security 
concerns  prompted  better  housing  protection.  Security  bars  had  been  installed  on 


[7.03]  Four-family,  two-bedroom  NCO  family 
housing  units  (Buildings  916  and  917)  showing 
center  carports  and  open  center  stairway.  Note 
rolling  topography  typical  of  the  900  housing 
area. 


7-10 


windows  of  new  construction  since  the  1960s;  during  the  1980s,  steel  security  bars 
were  installed  on  older  housing,  and  more  were  added  to  newer  housing  to  supple¬ 
ment  those  already  in  place  [7.04].  In  1986  plans  were  drawn  up  to  provide  central 
air  conditioning  systems  to  a  large  number  of  older  family  housing  units  built 
between  1920  and  1942.  In  addition  to  Fort  Clayton,  this  program  covered  housing  at 
Fort  Gulick,  Herrick  Heights,  Fort  Kobbe,  Quarry  Heights,  Fort  Sherman,  Fort 
Amador,  Corozal,  Curundu,  and  Fort  Davis.  At  Fort  Clayton,  this  affected  Buildings 
5,  72-92,  401-434,  501-517,  800-803, 805,  807, 814,  and  815. 

USARSO  Headquarters  (Building  95) 

Implementation  of  the  Panama  Canal  Treaties  in  1979  resulted  in  a  major  modifica¬ 
tion  of  Building  95  when  it  became  headquarters  for  USARSO,  the  regional  Army 
command.  Nearly  all  the  interior  areas  of  the  building  were  converted  to  adminis¬ 
trative  uses.  The  Army  Education  Center  moved  out,  and  the  PX  was  reduced  to  a 
shoppette,  although  the  cafeteria  remained.  The  post  office  branch  was  increased 
by  about  1000  sq  ft.  The  Post  Library  was  moved  to  the  center  area  of  the  third 
floor.  New  tenants  included  offices  for  Protocol,  Public  Affairs,  Logistics,  Budget 
Division,  Management  Division,  Operations,  Security,  and  the  Command  Group. 
Security  was  increased  as  the  USARSO  offices  came  into  the  building.  Phone  lines 
and  utilities  were  upgraded,  and  a  secure  computer  room  was  installed  in  1984. 
The  exterior  walls  were  extended  downward  to  enclose  the  crawl  space.  Security 
and  utilities  continued  to  be  periodically  upgraded  through  the  early  1990s.  By 
1990,  tenants  included  Operations,  Personnel,  Intelligence,  Logistics,  and  Informa¬ 
tion  Management,  a  Treaty  Implementation  office,  Military  Police,  Protocol,  Public 
Affairs,  and  the  Command  Group.  As  of  1997,  the  building  had  a  total  value  of 
about  $9.22  million. 

Several  changes  were  also  made  to  the  grounds  and  facilities  around  Building  95.  In 
1984  a  landscaping  plan  for  the  rear  of  the  building  resulted  in  a  semicircular  drive 
leading  up  from  Gaillard  Avenue  to  the  sally  port  entrance.  In  the  center  of  the  arc 
was  a  group  of  ornamental  plantings  and  stone  pavers.  A  long  canopy  was  installed 
leading  from  a  rear  exit  directly  to  the  south  of  the  sally  port  to  the  street.  The  fabric 
canopy  was  replaced  in  1993  with  a  red  Spanish  tile  roof.  A  series  of  new  plantings 
around  the  building  occurred  in  1983  with  the  addition  of  hedges,  shrubs,  ornamen¬ 
tals,  and  palms.  A  heliport  was  established  behind  Building  95  for  headquarters  use 
in  the  late  1980s.  In  1996  an  informational  marquee  was  erected  at  the  northwest 
corner  of  the  building. 

Community  Facilities 

In  the  aftermath  of  Operation  Just  Cause  there  was  an  upturn  of  theft  in  the  600  hous¬ 
ing  area.  To  improve  security  for  local  residents  a  small  military  police  (MP)  station 
was  built,  probably  in  1990  (although  the  property  record  specifies  no  date).  This 
structure,  the  Ada  Nice  Place  Community  Center  (Building  695),  was  located  on  Car¬ 
denas  Avenue  next  to  Quarters  683.  The  simple  structure  is  of  some  passing  interest 
because  its  design  appears  to  have  been  based  closely  on  a  World  War  II-era  plan  for 
a  temporary  MP  facility.  With  less  than  10  years  to  go  before  Fort  Clayton  would  be 


[7.04]  Typical  security  bars  in  the  300  Area 
Housing. 


7-11 


transferred  to  the  Republic  of  Panama,  this  wood  and  screen-sided  structure  was 
built  expediently  and  inexpensively,  and  was  not  necessarily  expected  to  endure  a 
whole  new  century  of  tropical  humidity,  mold,  and  insects. 

As  would  be  expected  in  the  continuing  drawdown  environment  of  Fort  Clayton 
(and  the  other  Army  bases  in  Panama),  very  little  other  nonresidential  new  construc¬ 
tion  was  undertaken  during  the  installation’s  last  20  years.  Upgrades  to  playgrounds, 
bus  stops,  softball  fields,  the  motor  pool  area,  and  power  transformers  were  the  most 
common  projects.  However,  two  projects  of  limited  scope  did  help  to  enhance  the 
quality  of  life:  the  construction  of  a  food  court  and  a  laundromat.  Located  on  a  trian¬ 
gular  piece  of  land  between  Morse  Avenue,  Connor  Street,  and  Craig  Avenue,  the 
food  court  included  a  Burger  King  and  a  Popeye’s  chicken  restaurant. 

The  final  element  added  to  Jarman  Field,  at  the  park  entrance,  was  a  miniature 
replica  of  the  Statue  of  Liberty.  The  7.5  ft  statue  was  presented  to  the  Panama  Canal 
Zone  Boy  Scout  Council  by  Morris  Hoffman,  a  scouting  enthusiast,  in  May  1951. 
Originally  displayed  at  the  Canal  Zone  library,  the  statue  was  later  moved  to  a  main 
intersection  near  the  Balboa  Police  Station.  Still  later  it  was  moved  to  the  foot  of  the 
Administration  Building  in  Balboa,  where  on  several  occasions  it  was  vandalized 
during  anti-U.S.  demonstrations  preceding  Operation  Just  Cause .  From  there  the 
statue  was  removed  and  put  into  storage  until  1991,  at  which  time  it  was  put  on  dis¬ 
play  at  the  corner  of  Morse  and  Craig  Avenues.  In  1999,  in  preparation  for  base  clo¬ 
sure  activities,  it  was  determined  that  the  Statue  of  Liberty  replica  would  be 
relocated  to  the  grounds  of  the  residence  of  the  U.S.  Ambassador  to  the  Republic  of 
Panama  in  La  Cresta,  Panama  City.  This  transfer  was  completed  in  July  1999.19 

Reutilization  Scenarios  for  Fort  Clayton 

The  Panamanian  government  has  developed  various  plans  for  the  disposition  and 
reuse  of  Fort  Clayton.  At  this  point,  three  possible  futures  stand  out. 

First,  some  or  all  of  the  housing  units  may  be  put  up  for  sale  to  private  individuals. 
This  precedent  was  established  with  earlier  reversions  in  the  former  Canal  Zone,  the 
most  successful  of  which  was  Albrook  Air  Force  Station.  At  Albrook,  tropical 
duplexes  were  purchased  and  extensively  renovated  by  the  new  owners.  These  ren¬ 
ovations  differentiated  the  houses  from  neighboring  buildings  but,  at  the  same  time, 
conveyed  an  impression  of  Panamanian  cultural  traits  across  the  former  base.  There 
is  a  high  probability  the  same  sort  of  property  conveyance  will  occur  at  Fort  Clayton. 

Second,  the  government  is  endeavoring  to  establish  the  City  of  Knowledge  (Cuidad 
del  Saber)  and  the  International  Technopark  of  Panama  on  the  site.  The  intended 
purpose  of  this  enterprise  is  to  combine  academics,  research,  cultural  exchange, 
and  technology  production  to  create  a  regional  nexus  for  technology  and  business 
development  in  Panama.  The  City  of  Knowledge  and  the  Technopark  hope  to  attract 
an  international  clientele  of  companies  working  in  seven  cluster  areas:  biodiversity, 
aquaculture,  marine  resources,  tropical  medicine,  data  processing,  multimedia, 
and  banking  software.  If  this  initiative  succeeds,  the  main  campus  will  be  located  at 
the  Clayton  quadrangle  area. 


7-12 


tee  is  .he  possibility  .ha.  some  portions  ol  For.  Clayton's  built  enyronmen, 

,  demolished.  There  is  precedent  lor  this  at  Albrook  Air  Force  Station.  Quarry 
is  and  others,  where  historic  buildings  haye  been  destroyed.  A  more  erdreme 
1  b,  the  Panamanian  owners  could  even  see  For.  Clayton  lollow  Fort 
lor  into  oblivion;  since  reversion  to  Panama,  For.  Amador  has  been  s, sterna.,, 
^d  The  vast  maiority  ol  its  buildings  have  been  MM  and  the  ones 
till  stand  have  little  historic  or  thematic  context  to  unify  them,  ecunre 
e  Fort  Amador  site  is  to  transform  the  entire  area  into  a  resort  hotel 
port.  Essentially,  Fort  Amador  no  longer  exists. 

a  similar  fate  could  conceivably  be  in  store  for  Fort  Clayton. 


:es  for  Chapter  7 

•ublic  Affairs  Office,  193rd  Infantry  Brigade, 
’anama,  “Impact  of  the  Panama  Canal  Treaty 
3n  the  United  States  Military  in  the  Panama 
Canal  Area"  (Fort  Clayton,  Republic  of 
Panama:  USARSO,  n.d.),  1-3;  McDonald, 
Schooling  in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone,  1, 23-25. 

Public  Affairs  Office,  “Impact  of  the  Panama 
Canal  Treaty,”  3;  Public  Affairs  Office,  U.S. 
Army  South,  “Public  Information  Paper" 

(Fort  Clayton,  Republic  of  Panama:  USARSO, 
1989),  2-6;  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  U.S.  Army 
Installations  in  Panama,  134. 

“Fort  Clayton,”  (#1),  (n.p.,  n.d.),  5;  Bernard 
Johnson  Incorporated,  “U.S.  SOUTHCOM 
Panama,  Regional  Complex  Master  Plan,  Vol. 
1— Report”  (Mobile,  AL:  U.S.  Army  Engineer 
District,  1986),  9-10;  William  R.  Evinger, 

Directory  of  U.S.  Military  Bases  Worldwide 
(Oryx  Press:  np,  1995),  268-269. 

Bernard  Johnson,  “USSOUTHCOM  Master 
Plan,  7. 


5  Ibid.,  8. 

6  Heike  Hasenauer,  “The  Canal-A  Historic 
Shortcut,”  Soldiers,  July  1999:  40. 

7  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  U.S.  Army  Installations 
in  Panama,  134-135;  Morris,  Security  and 
Defense  of  the  Panama  Canal,  137-140. 

8  Morris,  Security  and  Defense  of  the  Panama 
Canal  140-141;  Dolores  De  Mena,  “Annual 
Command  History,  Fiscal  Year  1990;  Opera¬ 
tion  Just  Cause/Promote  Liberty 
Supplement”  (Fort  Clayton,  Panama: 

USARSO  History  Office,  1993),  4-5. 

9  Morris,  Security  and  Defense  of  the  Panama 
Canal,  142,  De  Mena,  “Annual  Command  His¬ 
tory,  Fiscal  Year  1990,”  5-8. 

10  Morris,  Security  and  Defense  of  the  Panama 
Canal,  143,  De  Mena,  “Annual  Command  His¬ 
tory,  Fiscal  Year  1990,”  10-11. 

11  De  Mena,  “Annual  Command  History,  Fiscal 
Year  1990,”  13-14;  “Panama!  Operation  Just 
Cause”,  Airman,  (February  1990),  28. 


12  Morris,  Security  and  Defense  of  the  Panama 
Canal,  143. 

13  Malcolm  McConnell,  Just  Cause:  The  Real 
Story  of  America  s  High-Tech  Invasion  of 
Panama  (New  York:  St.  Martin’s  Press,  1991), 
147. 

14  De  Mena,  “Annual  Command  History,  Fiscal 
Year  1990,”  23-27. 

15  Ibid.,  13. 

16  Ibid.,  16-20. 

17  De  Mena,  “Annual  Command  History,  Fiscal 
Year  1990,”  88. 

18  Ibid.,  13-27;  McConnell,  Just  Cause,  93. 

19  Charles  S.  McElroy,  “Lady  Liberty:  Symbol  of 
lasting  freedom  finds  a  new  home,”  Tropic 
Times,  12  July  1999;  Stuart  G.  R.  Warner,  for¬ 
mer  Archivist,  U.S.  Army  South  (USARSO), 
Fort  Clayton,  electronic  communication  with 
author  dated  14  July  2000. 


7-13 


CHAPTER  8 


The  Final  Chapter 

The  Last  Drawdown 

As  the  transfer  date  for  the  Panama  Canal  drew  nearer,  the  final  drawdown  of  forces 
began  at  Fort  Clayton.  The  main  Army  component  on  post,  the  193rd  Infantry 
Brigade  (Bight),  cased  its  colors  on  14  October  1994.  (One  of  its  subordinate  com¬ 
mands,  the  5th  Battalion,  87th  Infantry,  remained  active  at  Fort  Clayton  until  15  Octo¬ 
ber  1996.)  In  1995  the  3rd  Special  Operations  Support  Command  and  the  128th 
Aviation  Brigade  left  Fort  Clayton;  major  units  remaining  at  that  time  were  the  Mili¬ 
tary  Police  Command,  U.S.  Army  Garrison-Panama,  and  the  106th  Signal  Brigade. 
Tenant  units  included  the  American  Red  Cross,  the  Army  Recreation  Machine  Pro¬ 
gram,  Southern  Command  Network,  the  Training  and  Doctrine  Command 
(TRADOC)  Liaison  Office,  and  the  U.S.  Army  Trial  Defense  Service  [8.01,  8.02]. 1 


[8.01]  Aerial  view  of  Soldier’s  Field  Quadrangle 
with  the  rear  of  Building  129  in  foreground,  ca. 
1996. 


[8.02]  Overview  of  Fort  Clayton  and  the  canal 
from  Gun  Hill. 


8-1 


[8.03]  U.S.  Army  South  Departure  Ceremony  at  Soldier's  Field,  Fort  Clayton,  30  July  1999. 


USARSO  headquarters  relocated  to  Puerto  Rico  in  August  1999.  On  30  July  1999,  a 
departure  ceremony  was  held  for  USARSO  at  Soldiers  Field,  Fort  Clayton  [8.03].  A 
crowd  of  military  and  civilian  personnel  watched  as  USARSO  cased  its  colors.  To 
symbolize  the  historic  role  of  the  U.S.  Army  in  Panama,  a  ceremonial  color  guard 
was  dressed  in  uniforms  representing  the  first  infantry  soldiers  at  Fort  Clayton  [8.04] . 

Fort  Clayton  was  one  of  the  last  active  U.S.  military  installations  in  the  Republic  of 
Panama,  completing  its  mission  only  1  month  before  the  transfer  of  the  Panama 
Canal.  For  its  last  few  months  as  a  U.S.  Army  post  it  housed  only  a  small  security 
force.  The  Stars  and  Stripes  flying  over  Fort  Clayton  were  lowered  for  the  last  time  in 
a  30  November  1999  ceremony.  Three  identical  sets  of  U.S.  and  Panamanian  flags 
were  raised  and  lowered  during  this  ceremony.  On  the  following  day,  1  December 
1999,  Simon  Ferro,  the  U.S.  Ambassador  to  Panama,  presented  a  set  of  the  ceremo¬ 
nial  flags  to  President  Mireya  Moscoso.  This  action  brought  to  an  end  the  final  chap¬ 
ter  in  the  story  of  Fort  Clayton,  which  for  almost  80  years  stood  as  a  sentinel  on  the 
Pacific  to  help  guarantee  the  world  safe  transit  of  the  Panama  Canal. 

The  Final  Face  of  Fort  Clayton 

By  Treaty  Implementation  Day  in  1979,  Fort  Clayton  had  essentially  matured  into  its 
final  configuration.  In  1999,  the  final  value  of  the  facilities  on  post  was  placed  at 
$119,943,000.2  Stretching  from  the  200  barracks  area  in  the  northwest  to  Curundu  Ele¬ 
mentary  School  at  its  southeastern  edge,  Fort  Clayton  presented  the  classic  image  of 
a  tropical  U.S.  military  community.  The  use  of  similar  building  materials  over  time 
helped  to  create  a  sense  of  unity  and  identity  for  Fort  Clayton,  and  also  marked  it  as 
part  of  a  greater  community  of  U.S.  military  installations  whose  purpose  was  to 
ensure  the  security  of  the  Panama  Canal  in  peace  and  in  war.  The  importance  of  Fort 
Clayton’s  role  in  this  community  of  military  installations  was  declared  by  the  formal 
arrangement  of  large  barracks  around  the  main  quadrangle,  and  the  massive  pres¬ 
ence  of  Buildings  95  and  519.  Housing  areas  were  well  defined  and  mostly  separated 


[8.04]  Ceremonial  Color  Guard,  U.S.  Army 
South  Departure  Ceremony  at  Soldier's  Field, 
Fort  Clayton,  30  July  1999. 


8-2 


from  other  functional  activities.  This  layout  provided  a  sense  of  place  for  residents 
and  served  as  a  safe  play  environment  for  the  children  of  U.S.  military  personnel.  As 
the  century  progressed  Fort  Clayton  evolved  from  a  utilitarian  Army  installation  into 
a  true  home  for  the  force:  a  self-contained  family-oriented  community  that  is  fondly 
remembered  by  the  many  who  had  the  privilege  to  serve  there  [8.05] . 

The  End  of  an  Era 

For  almost  80  years  Fort  Clayton  and  its  battle-ready  troops  stood  watch  over  the 
Panama  Canal,  and  the  primary  mission  of  canal  defense  was  achieved  fully  and 
with  distinction.  The  waterway  was  never  damaged  through  sabotage  or  organized 
military  attack— not  even  in  the  midst  of  the  most  destructive  conflict  in  human  his¬ 
tory.  That  in  itself  is  a  remarkable  accomplishment  considering  the  strategic  impor¬ 
tance  of  this  little  strip  of  real  estate  to  the  adversaries  in  a  two-hemisphere  war.  The 
gates  were,  indeed,  well  guarded. 

In  addition  to  being  recognized  for  the  role  it  played  in  guarding  The  Eighth  Wonder 
of  the  World  during  the  20th  century,  Fort  Clayton  may  also  be  acknowledged  as  a 
dignified  and  potent  symbol  of  America’s  commitment  to  unencumbered  transit 
between  two  oceans  for  the  ships  of  all  nations.  The  fulfillment  of  that  commitment 
has  helped  not  only  to  ensure  the  canal’s  place  in  the  history  of  the  Americas,  but 
to  establish  it  as  part  of  a  global  shared  heritage. 


[8.05]  The  flags  of  the  United  States  of  America 
and  the  Republic  of  Panama  at  Fort  Clayton, 
lowered  at  sundown. 


But  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  Fort  Clayton  left  its  deepest  mark  on  the  men, 
women,  and  children  who  ever  called  it  their  home  for  a  time.  As  Major  General 
Philip  R.  Kensinger,  Jr.  spoke  at  the  USARSO  departure  ceremony  at  Fort  Clayton  on 
30  July  1999  it  was  clear  that  he  was  eulogizing  something  more  dear  to  his  audi¬ 
ence  than  a  well  planned,  tidily  landscaped  collection  of  government  buildings  cus¬ 
tomized  for  a  tropical  setting: 

In  a  few  short  minutes  we  will  case  our  colors  and  finish  this  ceremony.  Some  of 
you  may  walk  over  to  the  reception,  passing  the  solemn,  empty  buildings  that 
have  seen  so  many  soldiers  come  and  go ....  All  of  you,  though,  before  you  leave, 
will  probably  want  to  walk  or  drive  about  the  Fort  a  bit,  maybe  for  one  last  time,  to 
capture  in  your  mind  and  heart  a  final  picture— a  well  trimmed  school  yard  where 
your  children  played— an  empty  stable  where  horses  once  lopped  about— a  set  of 
quarters  that  you  once  called  home.  Pd  also  like  to  add  another  place,  one  which 
isn’t  even  on  Clayton,  the  Miraflores  locks  just  across  the  way.  From  there  you  can 
see  those  ingenious  locks  that  enable  the  canal  to  operate— and  you  can  see  the 
Gaillard  cut  through  the  mountains  that  only  the  United  States  could  make— and 
finally,  you  can  turn  back  and  see  Fort  Clayton,  it’s  flag  flying  high  and  proud  in  the 
humid,  tropical  air  of  Panama.  A  canal,  a  country,  a  fort.  The  names  are  easy  to 
remember.  The  sight  is  one  that  will  live  in  your  heart  forever. 

Major  General  Philip  R.  Kensinger,  Jr. 

Commanding  General 

U.S.  Army  South  and  Joint  Task  Force-Panama 

Fort  Clayton,  Panama,  30  July  1999 


8-3 


Notes  for  Chapter  8  2  Jim  PaSe-  Directorate  of  Engineering  and 

Housing,  USARSO,  electronic  communication 

1  De  Mena,  The  Era  of  US.  Army  Installations  *°  ^r^°yen»  Directorate  of  Engineering 

in  Panama ,  135.  and  Housing=  USARSO,  19  November  1999. 


8-4 


Images 

Editor's  note:  The  DEH,  U.S.  Army  Garrison— Panama  is  cited  below  as  the  source  for 
many  images  reproduced  in  this  document.  Because  this  DEH  repository  no  longer 
exists,  the  images  are  in  the  process  of  transfer  to  the  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration.  No  accession  numbers  are  available  at  this  time,  however,  because  the 
transfer  and  accessioning  process  has  not  been  completed  at  the  time  of  publication. 


[Cover  Photo] 

Initial  appearance  of  Fort  Clayton  showing  relationship  to  the  Panama  Canal  (looking  southeast  to 
Pacific  Terminus).  Private  collection  of  Vicente  A.  Pascual. 


1  The  Origins  of  U.S.  Presence  in  Panama  (1513-1917) 

[1.01]  Bird’s-eye  view  of  the  canal  and  Canal  Zone,  from  sea  to  sea.  The  Panama  Pacific  Line,  My 
Trip  Through  the  Panama  Canal  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  (New  York:  International  Mer¬ 
cantile  Marine  Company,  1932).  Private  collection  of  Julie  L.  Webster. 

[1.02]  Soldiers  on  steam  shovel  in  Culebra  Cut.  Wibert  and  Dixon,  Pictorial  Panama  Canal.  Private 
collection  of  Julie  L.  Webster. 

[1.03]  ‘Uncle  Sam’  at  the  Panama  Canal,  illustrated  in  a  commemorative  article  on  the  20th  anniver¬ 
sary  of  the  opening  of  the  Panama  Canal.  Cleveland  Plain  Dealer,  12  August  1934, 1.  Private 
collection  of  Suzanne  P.  Johnson. 


2  Standing  Up  Fort  Clayton  (1917-1922) 

[2.01]  The  Miraflores  dump  area,  future  site  of  Fort  Clayton.  This  photograph  was  taken  in  1911  from 
the  hill  near  the  Panama  Railroad  tunnel  entrance.  Private  collection  of  George  M.  Chevalier. 

[2.02]  Surveyed  and  drawn  by  the  10th  U.S.  Infantry  in  1913,  this  map  shows  the  future  site  of  Fort 
Clayton  as  “Miraflores  Dump”  (near  bottom  right).  National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion  (NARA),  Cartographic  Division. 

[2.03]  Fill  has  been  completed,  1919,  and  construction  of  Fort  Clayton  is  set  to  begin.  This 

photograph  was  taken  from  above  the  Panama  Railroad  tunnel  entrance.  Private  collection  of 
George  M.  Chevalier. 

[2.04]  Panama  Canal  Department,  Army  Enlistment  Poster.  Private  collection  of  Vicente  A.  Pascual. 

[2.05]  Colonel  Bertram  T.  Clayton.  U.S.  Army  Military  History  Institute,  Special  Collections.  Carlisle 
Barracks,  Pennsylvania. 

[2.06]  Rio  Cardenas  Bridge.  Martin  Stupich,  photographed  for  Construction  Engineering  Research 
Laboratory  (CERL),  Engineer  Research  and  Development  Center,  U.S.  Army  Corps  of 
Engineers,  November  1999. 

[2.07]  Native  tropical  vegetation  still  thrives  along  this  road  at  Gun  Hill.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich 
for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[2.08]  Proposed  plan  for  Fort  Riley,  Kansas  (1887),  showing  similarities  between  artillery  post  layout 
and  initial  layout  of  Fort  Clayton.  Webster  et  al.  1993, 18. 

[2.09]  Typical  dry  closet  heating  element  assembly.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S. 
Army  South. 

[2.10]  Concrete  drain  details.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[2.11]  To  prevent  ponding  in  this  often  rain-soaked  environment,  paved  culverts  help  direct  runoff 
down  to  the  Cardenas  River.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 


IX 


[2.12]  This  type  of  slatted  wall  opening  is  representative  of  an  architectural  detail  that  was  used 
throughout  the  interior  spaces  of  early  post  housing  to  improve  ventilation.  Photograph  by  Mar¬ 
tin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[2.13]  M  Company,  33rd  Infantry,  in  formation  in  front  of  their  barracks.  Note  the  use  of  numerous 
large  screened  windows  in  the  barracks  buildings.  Private  collection  of  Robert  Karrer. 

[2.14]  Sketches  of  typical  insect  pan  and  stair  gap.  CERL. 

[2.15]  Traditional  (foreground)  and  modern-style  bohios  in  front  of  Building  518.  Photograph  by  Martin 
Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[2.16]  Wooden  Canal  Zone  building  sealed  with  gas-tight  tarpaulins  and  ready  for  fumigation  with 
methyl  bromide,  which  penetrates  lumber  and  kills  drywood  termite  colonies.  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[2.17]  Fort  Clayton  with  the  Panama  Canal  in  the  background.  Infantry  Journal,  Volume  XXVI,  Number 
4  (Panama  Number),  April  1925,  383.  Private  collection  of  Vicente  A.  Pascual. 

[2.18]  Map  of  the  first  buildings  to  be  constructed  at  Fort  Clayton.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book, 
Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[2.19]  Two-family  field  officers’  and  captains’  quarters.  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the  Gov¬ 
ernor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended  June  30, 1920,  (Washington,  DC:  GPO, 
1920),  Plate  2. 

[2.20]  Exterior  of  duplex  officers’  quarters  showing  several  defining  aspects  of  military  construction  in 
Panama.  Decorative  pilasters  appeared  on  all  the  original  barracks  and  quarters,  and  served 
as  a  unifying  architectural  element  for  the  post.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S. 
Army  South. 

[2.21]  Four-family  lieutenants’  quarters.  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The 
Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended  June  30, 1920,  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1920),  Plate  4. 

[2.22]  Postcard  view  of  Quarters  1-20;  alley  view  showing  servants’  quarters.  Private  collection  of 
Robert  Karrer. 

[2.23]  Six-set  lieutenants'  quarters.  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama 
Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended  June  30,  1920,  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1920),  Plate  3. 

[2.24]  Exterior  appearance  of  Building  20.  Note  the  Greek  Revival  stylistic  decoration  that  appeared 
on  all  of  the  larger  quarters  and  barracks  in  the  initial  construction  period.  Directorate  of  Engi¬ 
neering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[2.25]  Four-family  NCO  quarters.  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama 
Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended  June  30,  1920,  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1920),  Plate  5. 

[2.26]  Battalion  Barracks.  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal 
for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended  June  30,  1920,  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1920),  Plate  7. 

[2.27]  E  Company  day  room.  Private  collection  of  Raymond  J.  Martin. 

[2.28]  Special  Barracks.  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for 
the  Fiscal  Year  Ended  June  30,  1920,  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1920),  Plate  6. 

[2.29]  Regimental  Headquarters.  The  Panama  Canal,  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama 
Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended  June  30,  1920,  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1920),  Plate  1. 

[2.30]  Post  Exchange  in  Building  21,  Headquarters  Building.  Private  collection  of  Robert  Karrer. 

[2.31]  Building  37,  Quartermaster  Office  and  Warehouse.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate 
of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[2.32]  Building  54,  Utilities  Shop  and  Tool  Room.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of  Engi¬ 
neering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[2.33]  Atypical  transformer  house  constructed  in  1920.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate 
of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[2.34]  Building  40,  Guard  House.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of  Engineering  and 
Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[2.35]  Front  view  of  Quarters  5.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[2.36]  Rear  view  of  Quarters  5.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[2.37]  Aerial  view  of  the  first  buildings  at  Fort  Clayton.  Private  collection  of  Louie  C.  Jenkins. 


x 


3  Settling  in  for  the  Century:  Between  the  Wars  at  Fort  Clayton 
(1923-1935) 

[3.01]  1990s  aerial  view  of  Fort  Clayton  showing  elements  of  design  principles  from  the  1930s.  Pho¬ 
tograph  by  Stuart  G.R.  Warner,  Archivist,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.02]  Aerial  view  of  Fort  Clayton  prior  to  1930s  construction  programs.  Private  collection  of  George 
M.  Chevalier. 

[3.03]  Machine  gun,  pistol,  and  rifle  range,  Fort  Clayton.  Private  collection  of  Vicente  A.  Pascual. 

[3.04]  Members  of  Machine  Gun  Company  M,  33rd  Infantry,  Fort  Clayton,  March  1933.  Signal  Corps 
photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  164,  SC  319745  (WWIi)]. 

[3.05]  Machine  gun  firing  practice  at  the  Fort  Clayton  Firing  Range.  Private  collection  of  George  M. 
Chevalier. 

[3.06]  Machete  instruction  showing  the  correct  method  of  protecting  the  body  when  down.  Machetes 
were  a  basic  weapon  of  jungle  troops.  Signal  Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Divi¬ 
sion  [111  SC,  Box  18,  SC  139332  (WWIi)]. 

[3.07]  Troops  of  H  Company,  33rd  Infantry,  returning  from  a  ‘field  trip.’  Private  collection  of  Louie  C. 
Jenkins. 

[3.08]  2nd  Field  Artillery  troops  on  maneuvers.  Private  collection  of  Vicente  A.  Pascual. 

[3.09]  The  Panama  City  Carnival  Queen  watches  a  polo  match  with  General  Martin  at  Fort  Clayton. 
Photograph  by  J.  Fisher,  private  collection  of  Suzanne  P.  Johnson. 

[3.10]  A  St.  Patrick’s  Day  Dance.  Signal  Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC, 
Box  12,  SC  131941  (WWII)]. 

[3.11]  A  bride  and  groom  ride  on  mules  as  they  pass  under  crossed  sabers.  Private  collection  of 
Vicente  A.  Pascual. 

[3.12]  The  tables  are  set  for  the  33rd  Infantry’s  Christmas  meal.  Private  collection  of  Louie  C. 

Jenkins. 

[3.13]  The  1928  Canal  Zone  boxing  champion  hailed  from  Fort  Clayton,  and  many  of  his  fellow 
soldiers  rode  the  train  to  Colon  for  the  championship  bout.  Private  collection  of  James  H. 

Sauer. 

[3.14]  Baseball  enthusiasts  watch  a  game  between  the  Montreal  Royals  and  the  Army  All-Stars  at  Bal¬ 
boa,  Canal  Zone,  14  March  1947.  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  SC  297147 
(WWII)]. 

[3.15]  Preparing  for  the  Organization  Day  Costume  Parade  at  Fort  Clayton,  6  July  1926.  Photograph 
by  J.  Fisher,  private  collection  of  James  H.  Sauer. 

[3.16]  33rd  Infantry  Organization  Day  program,  6  July  1940.  Private  collection  of  Louie  C.  Jenkins. 

[3.17]  U.S.  Army  band  marches  down  Avenida  Central  in  Panama  City  during  Panamanian  Indepen¬ 
dence  Day  parade,  4  November  1942.  Signal  Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Divi¬ 
sion  [111  SC,  Box  38,  SC  175385  (WWII)]. 

[3.18]  Pass  for  entering  Panama  City.  Private  collection  of  Vicente  A.  Pascual. 

[3.19]  Crowd  leaving  the  bull  ring  after  a  fight,  Panama  City.  Photograph  by  J.  Fisher,  private 
collection  of  James  H.  Sauer. 

[3.20]  Soldiers  relax  at  the  Fort  Kobbe  Beach  Club.  Private  collection  of  Joseph  DeBenedetto. 

[3.21]  Hamburg-American  Line  advertisement.  Scientific  American,  11  January  1913. 

[3.22]  President  Roosevelt  and  Panamanian  dignitaries  during  an  FDR  visit  to  the  isthmus.  Private  col¬ 
lection  of  Raymond  J.  Martin. 

[3.23]  Soldiers  snap  to  attention  as  FDR  passes  during  his  automobile  tour  of  Fort  Clayton.  Private 
collection  of  Louie  C.  Jenkins. 

[3.24]  2nd  Field  Artillery  patch.  Private  collection  of  Vicente  A.  Pascual. 

[3.25]  The  1933  officers’  quarters  area  with  curving  street  and  tropical  vegetation.  Photograph  by 
Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 


XI 


[3.26]  Company  officers’  quarters  (Buildings  72-85)  take  shape,  25  May  1933.  NARA  Textual 
Records  Division  [RG  77,  Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  67,  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton  (2),  S.C.  2561]. 

[3.27]  Houses  being  erected  in  "Colonels’  Row,’’  Fort  Clayton,  25  May  1933.  Signal  Corps 
photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  164,  SC  319760  (WWII)]. 

[3.28]  Company  officers’  quarters.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of  Engineering  and 
Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.29]  Floor  plans  for  company  officers’  quarters,  Buildings  72-85.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and 
Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.30]  Elevations  for  company  officers’  quarters,  Buildings  72-85.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and 
Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.31]  Field  officers’  quarters  (Buildings  86  and  87)  two  months  after  completion,  23  March  1935. 
NARA  Textual  Records  Division  [RG  77,  Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box 
67,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  S.C.  3516]. 

[3.32]  Elevations  for  field  officers’  quarters,  Buildings  86-87.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing, 
U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.33]  Floor  plans  for  field  officers’  quarters,  Buildings  86-87.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Hous¬ 
ing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.34]  Concrete  frame  in  place  and  roof  construction  underway  on  NCO  quarters,  Buildings  801-802, 
25  May  1933.  NARA  Textual  Records  Division  [RG  77,  Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment 
9,  Shelf  5,  Box  67,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  S.C.  2564]. 

[3.35]  NCO  quarters,  Buildings  800-801, 1941-1942.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.36]  Elevations  for  NCO  quarters,  Buildings  800-801.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S. 
Army  South. 

[3.37]  First  floor  plan  for  NCO  quarters,  Buildings  800-801.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing, 
U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.38]  Exterior  walls  of  Building  95  under  construction,  28  June  1933.  NARA  Textual  Records  Division 
[RG  77,  Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  67,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  S.C. 

2770] . 

[3.39]  Building  95  center  sally  port  under  construction,  28  June  1933.  NARA  Textual  Records  Division 
[RG  77,  Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  67,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  S.C. 

2771] . 

[3.40]  Front  elevations,  Building  95.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.41]  Building  95  architectural  detail.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[3.42]  2nd  Field  Artillery  Inspection  in  front  of  Building  95.  Private  collection  of  Robert  Karrer. 

[3.43]  The  45th  Cavalry  celebrates  Organization  Day  in  front  of  Building  95,  1952.  Private  collection  of 
Robert  Karrer. 

[3.44]  U.S.  forces  crossing  Miraflores  Locks  over  a  lock  gate  (c.  1928).  Photograph  by  J.  Fisher, 
private  collection  of  James  H.  Sauer. 

[3.45]  U.S.  troops  at  Miraflores  Locks  (c.  1928).  Photograph  by  J.  Fisher,  private  collection  of  James 
H.  Sauer. 

[3.46]  Building  106,  Field  Artillery  Equipment  Shed  for  One  Battery.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book, 
Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.47]  Rigging  line  in  Building  50,  Rigging  Shed.  Note  the  Spanish  yokes.  Photograph  by  J.  Fisher,  pri¬ 
vate  collection  of  James  H.  Sauer. 

[3.48]  Blacksmith  and  Woodshed,  Building  51.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 


xii 


[3.49]  Coal  Bin  and  Loading  Platform,  Building  56.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book ,  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.50]  Post  Storage  House,  Building  59.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book ,  Directorate  of  Engineering 
and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.51]  An  attempt  to  mount  mules  with  anti-aircraft  machine  guns— “the  mules  didn’t  like  it."  James 
H.  Sauer,  2000.  Photograph  by  J.  Fisher,  private  collection  of  James  H.  Sauer. 

[3.52]  The  2nd  Field  Artillery  prepares  for  a  retiree’s  final  ride.  Private  collection  of  Robert  Karrer. 

[3.53]  Motor  Pool  Buildings  100, 102,  and  103.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November 
1999. 

[3.54]  Building  68,  Ordnance  Storage  Magazine.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of  Engi¬ 
neering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.55]  Hangar  and  planes  at  Fort  Clayton’s  Miller  Flying  Field  (c.  1927).  Photograph  by  J.  Fisher,  pri¬ 
vate  collection  of  James  H.  Sauer. 

[3.56]  Miller  Flying  Field  consisted  of  a  sod  runway  and  a  standard-design  Army  hangar.  NARA  Textual 
Records  Division  [RG  77,  Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  67,  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton  (2),  S.C.  1404]. 

[3.57]  Building  63,  Air  Corps  Barracks  and  Operations  Office  for  12  men.  Fort  Clayton  Construction 
Book,  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.58]  Soldiers  compete  in  tug  o’  war  at  a  Panama  Canal  Department  track  meet  at  Miller  Field, 

1935.  Private  collection  of  George  M.  Chevalier. 

[3.59]  Building  52,  Gymnasium,  1939.  Private  collection  of  Louie  C.  Jenkins. 

[3.60]  Bowling  alley  in  front  of  the  adjoining  gymnasium.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate 
of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.61]  Fort  Clayton's  first  swimming  pool.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of  Engineering 
and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.62]  Fort  Clayton  Officers’  Club,  Building  38.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.63]  The  Fort  Clayton  Military  Police  motorcycle  patrol  in  front  of  Officers’  Club.  Private  collection  of 
Robert  Karrer. 

[3.64]  “El  Rancho"  beer  garden,  Panama  City.  Private  collection  of  Suzanne  P.  Johnson. 

[3.65]  Street  view  (front)  of  Service  Club,  Building  39.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.66]  Rear  beer  garden,  Building  39, 1939.  Private  collection  of  Louie  C.  Jenkins. 

[3.67]  Building  49,  Fort  Clayton  Theatre.  Private  collection  of  Raymond  J.  Martin. 

[3.68]  Northeast  elevation  of  Theater  (30  September  1934).  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing, 
U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.69]  Theatre  #1  undergoing  rehabilitation  for  air  conditioning  (c.  1954).  Directorate  of  Engineering 
and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[3.70]  Panoramic  view  of  Fort  Clayton  and  Miraflores  Locks,  1936.  Photography  Collection,  Harry 
Ransom  Humanities  Research  Center,  The  University  of  Texas  at  Austin. 


4  Hostilities  on  Two  Horizons  (1936-1941) 

[4.01]  Anti-aircraft  warning  signal  tower  constructed  at  Fort  Clayton  by  The  Panama  Canal,  July  1940. 
Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[4.02]  Temporary  tent  quarters  for  officers,  1941.  Private  collection  of  Arthur  R.  Datnoff. 

[4.03]  Typical  style  of  aluminum  jalousies  used  in  Canal  Zone  Army  construction,  28  December 
1950.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 


xiii 


[4.04]  11th  Engineers  barracks  (Buildings  127  and  126),  right,  with  beer  garden  (Building  39)  at  left. 
Private  collection  of  Robert  Karrer. 

[4.05]  Interior  of  barracks.  Private  collection  of  George  M.  Chevalier. 

[4.06]  11th  Engineers  regimental  barracks  (Buildings  128, 130-132),  4  June  1940.  NARA  Textual 

Records  Division  [RG  77,  Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  68,  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton  (2),  QM  129]. 

[4.07]  Building  129,  11th  Engineers  administration  building.  Private  collection  of  Robert  Karrer. 

[4.08]  11th  Engineers  officers  in  front  of  their  Headquarters  Building  (Building  129),  1942.  “The  cap¬ 
tain,  second  man  from  left  sitting,  is  Andy  Goodpaster,  who  became  a  4-star  General.  All  the 
11th  vets  are  proud  of  him.”-Robert  H.  Tippett,  2000.  Private  collection  of  Robert  H.  Tippett. 

[4.09]  Aerial  view  of  U.S.  Army  Coast  Artillery  Area,  later  known  as  U.S.  Army  Garrison  Area  (200  Bar¬ 
racks  Area).  Photograph  by  PFC  John  Brady,  18  September  1964.  Signal  Corps  photograph, 
NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  387,  SC  612481  (WWII)]. 

[4.10]  Front  and  Rear  Elevations,  Standard  Barracks,  200  Men.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Hous¬ 
ing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[4.11]  Front,  Rear,  and  End  Elevations,  Standard  Barracks,  100  Men,  Directorate  of  Engineering  and 
Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[4.12]  Temporary  officers’  quarters,  Buildings  88-92.  NARA  Textual  Records  Division  [RG  77,  Stack 
Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  p  61,  QM50]. 

[4.13]  Panama  Mobile  Force  Headquarters  Building.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[4.14]  Range  Houses  on  Target  Range  at  Chiva  Chiva.  NARA  Textual  Records  Division  [RG  77,  Stack 
Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  p  61,  QM481]. 

[4.15]  Targets  on  the  500-yard  range.  NARA  Textual  Records  Division  [RG  77,  Stack  Area  370,  Row 
53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  p  61,  QM482]. 

[4.16]  Front  view  of  the  Fire  Station  and  Guard  House,  1941.  NARA  Textual  Records  Division  [RG  77, 
Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  p  35]. 

[4.17]  Fort  Clayton  firemen  practice  a  tower  and  hose  drill  for  Fire  Prevention  Week,  September  1948. 
Signal  Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  173,  SC  330684 
(WWII)]. 

[4.18]  Presentation  of  individual  awards  for  Fire  Drill  Competition,  October  1954.  Directorate  of  Engi¬ 
neering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[4.19]  A  soldier  “working  on  her  own  show  at  Armed  Forces  Radio."  The  show,  called  “Doctors 
Orders,"  had  a  large  audience  in  May  1953.  U.S.  Army  photograph  by  SFC  L.  Grigor,  NARA  Still 
Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  295,  SC  479404  (WWII)]. 

[4.20]  A  Southern  Command  Network  (SCN)  radio  broadcast.  Courtesy  Tropic  Times. 

[4.21]  SCN  Dish.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[4.22]  Post  Office  (Building  151).  Private  collection  of  Robert  Karrer. 

[4.23]  Vehicle  maintenance  shop  (Building  152).  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November 
1999. 

[4.24]  Fort  Clayton  railroad  spur  track  under  construction.  NARA  Textual  Records  Division  [RG  77, 
Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  68.  Fort  Clayton  (2),  p  87]. 

[4.25]  View  from  Headquarters  Building  showing  bus  shelters,  1938.  Private  collection  of  Louie  C. 
Jenkins. 

[4.26]  Members  of  the  11th  Engineers  and  their  Army  Day  Display  at  Fort  Clayton.  Note  (left  to  right  in 
background)  beer  garden,  Theater  #2  under  construction,  gymnasium,  and  Theater  #1.  Private 
collection  of  Robert  Karrer. 

[4.27]  Building  71,  Theater  #2.  Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book,  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Hous¬ 
ing,  U.S.  Army  South. 


XIV 


5  Transit  Through  the  Second  World  War  (1941-1945) 

[5.01]  Japanese  internees  prepare  to  board  a  train  to  the  Balboa  Concentration  Camp.  Signal  Corps 
photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  14,  SC  134315  (WWII)]. 

[5.02]  “Bushmasters"  crossing  a  jungle  stream  in  back  of  Fort  Clayton,  June  1942.  Signal  Corps  pho¬ 
tograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  16,  SC  136155  (WWII)]. 

[5.03]  Nurses  learning  to  put  their  masks  on  properly  during  a  gas  mask  drill,  March  1942.  Signal 
Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  12,  SC  131950  (WWII)]. 

[5.04]  “Halt!  Who  goes  there?"  Pocket  Guide  to  Panama.  War  and  Navy  Departments:  Washington, 
DC,  1943. 

[5.05]  A  D-6  low-altitude  dilatable-type  balloon  at  the  Miraflores  Locks.  Signal  Corps  photograph, 

NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  12,  SC  131968  (WWII)]. 

[5.06]  A  dummy  plane  stands  beneath  a  shelter  at  Camp  Chorrera,  Panama,  28  August  1942.  Signal 
Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  92,  SC  237644  (WWII)]. 

[5.07]  1942  map  of  Fort  Clayton  showing  the  new  expansion  area.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and 
Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[5.08]  Interior  of  WWII-era  officer’s  quarters  showing  expansive  windows  and  the  use  of  slatted  blinds 
with  a  center  adjustment  rod,  October  1957.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S. 

Army  South. 

[5.09]  Two  ‘Army  wives’  chat  in  a  kitchen  outfitted  with  Miami-type  jalousie  windows,  1950s. 

USARCARIB  Pictorial  Division,  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[5.10]  First  wartime  housing  to  be  completed:  the  300  Area  NCO  quarters.  Photograph  by  Martin 
Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[5.11]  NCO  single  quarters  (Building  308).  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[5.12]  Company  officers’  duplex  quarters  (Buildings  411-413),  23  September  1953.  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[5.13]  Coast  Artillery  Headquarters  Building,  Fort  Clayton,  October  1942.  NARA  Textual  Records  Divi¬ 
sion  [RG  77,  Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  p  104]. 

[5.14]  Insignia  on  palm  trees  in  front  of  Building  200.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL, 
November  1999. 

[5.15]  Anti-aircraft  Defense  Command  Post,  Gun  Hill.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL, 
November  1999. 

[5.16]  A  military  police  dog  at  work.  Courtesy  Tropic  Times. 

[5.17]  Searchlights  of  Battery  C,  4th  Coast  Artillery  Corps,  on  exhibit  at  a  Panama  Canal  Department 
Review.  Signal  Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  164,  SC 
319722  (WWII)]. 

[5.18]  Standard  regimental  garages  and  searchlight  sheds.  NARA  Textual  Records  Division  [RG  77, 
Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  p  115]. 

[5.19]  Quartermaster  maintenance  and  motor  repair  shop.  NARA  Textual  Records  Division  [RG  77, 
Stack  Area  370,  Row  53,  Compartment  9,  Shelf  5,  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2),  p  141]. 

[5.20]  Patients  in  ward  for  malaria  prevention  in  a  hospital  at  an  outpost  position,  February  1943.  Sig¬ 
nal  Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  92,  SC  237693  (WWII)]. 

[5.21]  Map  of  Fort  Clayton  (c.  1943)  showing  prevailing  winds.  U.S.  Army  Medical  Museum,  Fort  Sam 
Houston,  TX. 

[5.22]  Fort  Clayton  Sector  Hospital  (front  view)  shortly  after  completion  (c.  1943).  U.S.  Army  Medical 
Museum,  Fort  Sam  Houston,  TX. 

[5.23]  Fort  Clayton  Sector  Hospital  (rear  view)  shortly  after  completion  (c.  1943).  U.S.  Army  Medical 
Museum,  Fort  Sam  Houston,  TX. 

[5.24]  Fort  Clayton  medical  complex,  including  nurses’  dormitory,  male  staff  barracks,  and  ranking 
officer’s  quarters  (c.  1943).  U.S.  Army  Medical  Museum,  Fort  Sam  Houston,  TX 


xv 


[5.25]  Enlisted  men's  barracks  under  construction  near  hospital  (c.  1941-1942).  U.S.  Army  Medical 
Museum,  Fort  Sam  Houston,  TX. 

[5.26]  Special  Services  personnel  perform  many  duties  in  Athletic,  Recreational  and  Welfare  Activities 
which  include  the  operation  of  public  address  systems  in  parades,  ceremonies,  and  athletic 
events.  Photograph  by  S/Sgt  L.  Grigor,  16  January  1948,  Signal  Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still 
Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  147,  SC  301769  (WWII)]. 


6  The  Cold  War  Era  and  New  Missions  (1946-1978) 

[6.01]  A  member  of  the  242nd  Chemical  Supply  Detachment  demonstrates  an  M-l  smoke  potto  per¬ 
sonnel  participating  in  Operation  Jackpot  II  at  Fort  Clayton,  August  1953.  U.S.  Army  photogra¬ 
phy  by  SFC  L.  Grigor,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  277,  SC  458509  (WWII)]. 

[6.02]  General  of  the  Army  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower  motorcades  through  Fort  Clayton  during  his  1946 
visit  to  the  Canal  Zone.  Private  collection  of  Arthur  F.  Goldsmith. 

[6.03]  Protestors  attempting  to  enter  the  Canal  Zone  with  flags  and  signs  are  confronted  by  the  Pana¬ 
manian  National  Guard,  26  November  1959.  U.S.  Army  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs 
Division  [111  SC,  Box  350,  SC  568092  (WWII)]. 

[6.04]  President  Jimmy  Carter  and  First  Lady  Rosalynn  Carter  wave  to  a  cheering  crowd  at  Fort 

Clayton,  17  June  1978.  U.S.  Army  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box 
438,  SC  678745  (WWII)]. 

[6.05]  Actor  Cliff  Robertson  and  Major  General  Thomas  L.  Harrold,  Commanding  General, 
USARCARIB,  on  the  set  of  “The  Naked  and  the  Dead,”  filmed  in  Panama.  U.S.  Army 
photograph  by  SP3  Paul  Johnson,  10  December  1957,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111 
SC,  Box  327,  SC  525463  (WWII)]. 

[6.06]  Soldiers  watch  fellow  Cana!  Zone  GIs  help  to  stage  the  invasion  scene  for  the  RKO  film  “The 
Naked  and  the  Dead."  USARCARIB  troops  and  equipment  provided  an  essential  element  of 
authenticity  to  the  production.  U.S.  Army  photograph  by  SP3  Paul  Johnson,  11  December 
1957,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  327,  SC  525462  (WWII)]. 

[6.07]  Two  Kuna  men  from  the  San  Bias  Islands.  Private  collection  of  Stanley  A.  Chapman. 

[6.08]  Kuna  women  on  Fort  Clayton.  Photograph  by  Charlie  McElroy,  courtesy  Tropic  Times . 

[6.09]  Military  Amateur  Radio  Station  card  of  the  2nd  Field  Artillery.  Ham  radio  operators  would  note 
the  date,  time,  group,  and  location  of  a  contact  and  exchange  cards  with  one  another.  Private 
collection  of  Wayne  Worthington. 

[6.10]  Soldiers  of  the  7448th  Women’s  Army  Corp  (WAC)  Detachment,  Fort  Clayton,  relax  in  their  day 
room.  U.S.  Army  photograph  by  SFC  L.  Grigor,  22  May  1953,  NARA  [NARA  Order  Number  111 
SC,  Box  295,  SC  479407  (WWII)]. 

[6.11]  Two  members  of  the  7448th  WAC  Detachment  clean  their  quarters.  Photograph  by  SFC  L. 
Grigor,  22  May  1953,  Signal  Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box 
295,  SC  479400  (WWII)]. 

[6.12]  Line  of  100-man  barracks  at  Fort  Clayton  showing  enclosure  of  ground  floor,  reduced  window 
openings,  and  shingle  cladding  materials  on  mediaguas.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for 
CERL,  November  1999. 

[6.13]  Building  400,  showing  cantilevered  balconies.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  Novem¬ 
ber  1999. 

[6.14]  View  from  Quarters  370-375  showing  terraced  earthworks.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for 
CERL,  November  1999. 

[6.15]  The  518th  Combat  Engineers  use  a  “headache  ball"  to  demolish  Building  29.  Photograph  by 
SP2  L.W.  Guenther,  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[6.16]  1990s  photo  of  Capehart  NCO  quarters,  Building  820.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing, 
U.S.  Army  South. 

[6.17]  1990s  photo  of  1965  four-family,  three-bedroom  NCO  apartments  (Building  554).  Directorate 
of  Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 


XVI 


[6.18]  1965  two-story  duplex  officers’  quarters  on  Morse  Avenue.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for 
CERL,  November  1999. 

[6.19]  1969  NCO  housing  (Building  726,  front)  showing  horizontal  siding  on  exterior.  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[6.20]  1969  officer  housing  (Building  1028)  showing  center  carports  with  storage  areas  and  second- 
floor  balconies.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[6.21]  1969  officer  housing  (Building  1061)  showing  detail  of  louvered  folding  doors  for  carport  stor¬ 
age  area.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[6.22]  The  new  main  entrance  to  Fort  Clayton  under  construction  (c.  1954).  Directorate  of  Engineer¬ 
ing  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[6.23]  The  original  (side)  gate  at  Fort  Clayton,  September  1953.  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Hous¬ 
ing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[6.24]  Overview  from  the  pistol  range.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[6.25]  Soldiers  catch  their  breath  after  running  physical  training.  Courtesy  Tropic  Times. 

[6.26]  Petting  zoo  in  Miller  Field  recreation  area,  1950s.  Private  collection  of  Louie  C.  Jenkins. 

[6.27]  The  Post  Exchange  Shopping  Center  at  Building  95.  Photograph  by  PFC  John  Brady,  18  Sep¬ 
tember  1964,  Signal  Corps  photograph,  NARA  Still  Photographs  Division  [111  SC,  Box  387,  SC 
612482  (WWII)]. 

[6.28]  Monkey  and  alligator  detail  for  glazed  brick  wall,  Curundu  Elementary  School.  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  U.S.  Army  South. 

[6.29]  Training  exercise  at  Williford  Swimming  Pool.  Photograph  by  Stuart  G.R.  Warner,  Archivist,  U.S. 
Army  South. 

[6.30]  Detail  of  Reeder  Gymnasium,  Building  52.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November 
1999. 

[6.31]  Soldiers  run  physical  training  in  Reeder  Gymnasium,  Fort  Clayton.  Courtesy  Tropic  Times. 

[6.32]  Jarman  Field  grandstands.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 


7  From  Treaty  to  Transfer  (1979-1999) 

[7.01]  A  soldier  talks  with  a  mother  and  her  children  during  a  disaster  relief  operation  in  Bolivia. 
Courtesy  Tropic  Times. 

[7.02]  Flag-waving  Kuna  Indians  from  the  San  Bias  Islands  welcome  U.S.  Army  soldiers  to  their 
village.  Courtesy  Tropic  Times. 

[7.03]  Four-family,  two-bedroom  NCO  family  housing  units  (Buildings  916  and  917)  showing  center 
carports  and  open  center  stairway.  Note  rolling  topography  typical  of  the  900  housing  area. 
Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  November  1999. 

[7.04]  Typical  security  bars  in  the  300  Area  Housing.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL,  Novem¬ 
ber  1999. 


8  The  Final  Chapter 

[8.01]  Aerial  view  of  Soldier's  Field  Quadrangle  with  the  rear  of  Building  129  in  foreground,  ca.  1996. 
Private  collection  of  Robert  H.  Tippett. 

[8.02]  Overview  of  Fort  Clayton  and  the  canal  from  Gun  Hill.  Photograph  by  Martin  Stupich  for  CERL, 
November  1999. 

[8.03]  U.S.  Army  South  Departure  Ceremony  at  Soldier's  Field,  Fort  Clayton,  30  July  1999.  Courtesy 
Tropic  Times. 

[8.04]  Ceremonial  Color  Guard,  U.S.  Army  South  Departure  Ceremony  at  Soldier's  Field,  Fort  Clayton, 
30  July  1999.  Courtesy  Tropic  Times. 

[8.05]  The  flags  of  the  United  States  of  America  and  the  Republic  of  Panama  at  Fort  Clayton,  lowered 
at  sundown.  Courtesy  Tropic  Times. 


XVI! 


ferences 


,  Th  nEu  us  Army  Garrison-Panama  is  identified  below  as 

of  publication. 

,tow  Regimenal  Con*,,  Team  Asocial  'A  B™<  «*»»  ol «*  33-  M 
npublished  manuscript,  n.d. 

ege  Park,  MD. 

MD  . 

Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

my  Tropic  Testing  in  Panama,  Unpunished  manuscript  (Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate  of 
Engineering  and  Housing,  United  States  Army  Garrison-Panama,  1995). 

dwin,  John  R.  “History  of  the  Panama  Canal  Department.”  Infantry  Journal,  Vol.  26  (April  1925), 

l<hwhr/^Alliam  C.  “A  History  of  Army  Peacetime  Housing"  (Fort  Belvoir,  VA:  Office  of  History,  Head- 
quarters,  US.  Army  Corps  of  Engineers,  1993). 
irardinelli,  S.D.  OPERATION  TRANSIT  in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone.  18  December  1947, 184. 

>rnard  Johnson  Incorporated.  "U.S.  SOUTHCOM  Panama_Regional  Complex  Master  Plan.  Vol.  1, 
‘Report,  (Mobile,  AL:  U.S.  Army  Engineer  District,  1986). 
iesanz  John  and  Mavis.  The  People  of  Panama  (New  York:  Columbia  University  Press,  1955). 
ishop,  Joseph  Bucklin  and  Farnham.  Goethals:  Genius  of  the  Panama  Canal  (New  York  and  London. 
Harper  and  Brothers  Publishers,  1930). 

lishop.  Major  General  H.G.,  Chief  of  Field  AniUe^y,  Washing^  q[  EnginejSi  Construction 

Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

„  i  u-f  iiu  Aiioust  1917.  Record  Group  185,  Records 
30aof  ^ S2 PaTm! £  Folder  2.  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Brown,  Maior^e'j®^al^^°"’^°^1jggje^g^^I^rQ^^7^chficedIthe^Chief  of  Engineers, 
Constnjction  Completion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  676^470.2  Panama  Canal  Dept.  Nationa 
Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 


XIX 


“Build  Own  TV  Antenna  In  a  Night.”  Buccaneer.  25  May  1956. 

“Building  List:  Fort  Clayton  and  Off  Post  Areas  (AAD  HQ  [PAC]),  CP  Cochran,  Chiva  Asphalt  (M), 
Chiva  Radio,  Chiva  Quarry  (M),  Madden  Dam,  Pedro  Miguel,  Summit  Sub  Sta”  (Corozal,  Panama: 
Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  United  States  Army  Garrison-Panama,  n.d.). 

Burt,  Geoffrey  C.  and  Anne  M.  Spafford.  “The  Shaping  of  Landscapes  at  U.S.  Military  Installations  in 
the  Former  Panama  Canal  Zone,  Republic  of  Panama”  (Champaign,  IL:  U.S.  Army  Construction 
Engineering  Research  Laboratories  (CERL),  1996). 

Canal  Record  15  July  1914, 13  June  1917, 29  August  1917, 12  February  1919, 4  February  1920. 

Caribbean  Defense  Command,  Historical  Section.  “Construction  &  Real  Estate  Activities  in  the 
Caribbean  Defense  Command”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Caribbean  Defense  Command,  1946). 
USARSO  History  Office  files.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Caribbean  Defense  Command,  Historical  Section.  The  Caribbean  Defense  Command  in  the  Defense  of 
the  Americas.  II  Vols  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Caribbean  Defense  Command,  circa  1949).  USARSO 
History  Office  files.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Chapel  Center  Fort  Clayton  Dedication  Ceremony”  (Fort  Clayton,  CZ:  n.p.,  1965). 

Chevalier,  George.  “Memories  of  the  Early  Years  of  Fort  Clayton,  Panama  Canal  Zone.”  Unpublished 
manuscript,  1999. 

Chief  of  Staff,  PCD.  Memorandum  to  Department  Quartermaster,  PCD,  6  August  1919.  Record 

Group  185,  Panama  Canal  1914-1950.  Box  383,  Folder  2.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD. 

Chief  of  Staff,  Supply  Division,  Washington,  DC.  Memorandum  from  unknown,  1  November  1933. 
Record  Group  407,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  General  Central  Files  1926-1939.  Box  2990,  Fort  Clark  to 
Fort  Clayton.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Chief  of  Staff,  War  Department,  General  Staff,  Washington,  DC.  Memorandum  from  unknown,  4 
November  1933.  Record  Group  407,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  General  Central  Files  1926-1939.  Box 
2990,  Fort  Clark  to  Fort  Clayton.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Chynoweth,  Major  B.G.  “A  Tour  of  Duty  in  Panama."  Infantry  Journal,  Vol.  26  (April  1925),  375-381. 

Clark,  David  E.  Interview  by  author,  28  February  2000. 

“Clayton  Hospital  Closes  Sunday.”  Buccaneer  13  August  1954. 

Collins,  John  O.  The  Panama  Guide  (Mount  Hope,  CZ:  I.C.C.  Press,  1912). 

Commanding  Officer,  Fort  Clayton.  Memorandum  to  Commanding  General,  Panama  Canal 

Department,  1928.  Record  Group  407,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  General  Central  Files  1926-1939.  Box 
2990,  Fort  Clark  to  Fort  Clayton.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Commemorative  Medallion  Celebrating  the  End  of  an  Era.”  Tropic  Times.  29  October  1999. 

“Completion  Report  Covering  the  Construction  of  Stables  (Bldgs  100-111)  for  the  2nd  Field  Artillery 
Battalion  at  Fort  Clayton,  C.Z,"  26  September  1934.  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of 
Engineers,  Construction  Completion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  67,  Claremont  Terminal  to  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton,  CZ,  Vol.  I.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Completion  Report  Covering  the  Construction  of  Two  (2)  Barracks  for  the  11th  Engineers  at  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton,  Canal  Zone  under  Contract  No.  W-61-qm-124  with  Novey  &  Lutrell,  P.O.  Box  2007,  Ancon,  C.Z., 
July  23, 1937.  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943.  Box  67,  Claremont  Terminal  to  Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1.  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Completion  Report  Covering  Two  Sets  of  Field  Officers’  Quarters  at  Fort  Clayton,  C.Z.”  Record  Group 
77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  67, 

Claremont  Terminal  to  Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 


XX 


“Completion  Report  for  the  Construction  and  Completion  of  Temporary  Officers  Quarters  at  Fort  Clay¬ 
ton,  Canal  Zone,  June  17, 1940.”  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction 
Completion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2).  National  Archives  and  Records  Adminis¬ 
tration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Completion  Report  No.  5  on  the  Construction  and  Completion  of  Railroad  Spur  Track  at  Fort  Clayton, 
Canal  Zone”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Corps  of  the  Constructing  Quartermaster,  Panama  Canal 
Department,  12  July  1941.)  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Com¬ 
pletion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2).  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Completion  Report  No.  6  Covering  Construction  and  Completion  of  Mobile  Force  Headquarters 
Building  at  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Office  of  the  Constructing  Quartermas¬ 
ter,  Panama  Canal  Department,  15  June  1941.)  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers, 
Construction  Completion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2).  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Completion  Report  No.  7  on  the  Construction  and  Completion  of  11th  Engineers  Motor  Pool  at  Fort 
Clayton,  Canal  Zone”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Office  of  the  Constructing  Quartermaster,  Panama 
Canal  Department,  13  August  1941.)  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construc¬ 
tion  Completion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2).  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Completion  Report  of  Five  Barracks  Buildings  and  Appurtenant  Utilities  at  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone, 
May  20, 1940.”  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943.  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (2).  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  Col¬ 
lege  Park,  MD. 

“Completion  Report  on  the  Construction  and  Completion  of  a  Target  Range  at  Chiva  Chiva,  Corundu 
Military  Reservation,  Canal  Zone”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Office  of  the  Constructing  Quartermaster, 
Panama  Canal  Department,  16  October  1940.)  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers, 
Construction  Completion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (3).  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Completion  Report  on  the  Construction  and  Completion  of  Fire  and  Guard  House,  Quartermaster 
Storehouse  and  Office,  and  Artillery  Engineer’s  Warehouse  at  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone”  (Quarry 
Heights,  CZ:  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Caribbean  Defense  Command,  14  July  1942.)  Record 
Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  68, 
Fort  Clayton  (3).  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Completion  Report  on  the  Construction  and  Completion  of  Headquarters  Building  at  Fort  Clayton, 
Canal  Zone”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Corps  of  Engineers,  Isthmian  District,  Caribbean  Defense  Com¬ 
mand,  9  October  1942.)  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Comple¬ 
tion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (3).  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

“Completion  Report  on  the  Construction  and  Completion  of  Ordnance  Storehouse  at  Fort  Clayton, 
Canal  Zone”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Corps  of  Engineers,  Isthmian  District,  Caribbean  Defense  Com¬ 
mand,  9  October  1942.)  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Comple¬ 
tion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  68,  Fort  Clayton  (3).  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

Conn,  Stetson,  Rose  C.  Engelman,  and  Byron  Fairchild.  The  Western  Hemisphere:  Guarding  the  United 
States  and  Its  Outposts.  Vol.  12  of  United  States  Army  in  World  War  II.  ed.  Stetson  Conn  (Washing¬ 
ton,  DC:  GPO,  1964). 

Constructing  Quartermaster,  Panama  Canal  Department.  Letter  to  Engineer  of  Maintenance,  The 
Panama  Canal,  7  March  1922.  Record  Group  185,  Records  of  The  Panama  Canal,  1914-1950.  Box 
383,  Folder  3.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Construction  Report  Covering  the  Construction  of  Barracks  &  Quarters  for  the  2nd  Field  Artillery  at 
Fort  Clayton,  C.Z.,”  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion 
Reports  1917-1943.  Box  67,  Claremont  Terminal  to  Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1.  National  Archives  and 
Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 


XXI 


Datnoff,  Colonel,  U.S.  Army  (Retired)  Arthur  R.  Letter  dated  19  December  1999  to  Julie  L.  Webster. 

De  Mena,  Dolores.  “Annual  Command  History,  Fiscal  Year  1990;  Operation  Just  Cause/Promote 
Liberty  Supplement”  (Fort  Clayton,  CZ:  USARSO  History  Office,  1993). 

- History  of  the  United  States  Army  in  the  Panama  Canal  Area.”  Unpublished  manuscript 

(Fort  Clayton,  CZ:  USARSO  History  Office,  1994). 

- “Clayton  Hospital  Advanced  Medicine.”  Tropic  Times.  14  January  1994. 

- “Fort  Clayton”  (Fort  Clayton,  CZ:  USARSO  History  Office,  1995). 

- “The  Era  of  U.S.  Army  Installations  in  Panama”  (Fort  Clayton,  CZ:  USARSO  History  Office, 

1996). 

Douglas,  W.J.,  Engineer  of  Maintenance,  The  Panama  Canal.  Letter  to  Major  Alfred  L.  Ganahl, 

Commanding  Officer,  Military  Survey  of  Panama,  Corozal,  CZ,  19  March  1919.  Record  Group  185, 
Records  of  The  Panama  Canal,  1914-1950.  Box  383,  Folder  3.  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

DuVal,  Miles  P.  Cadiz  to  Cathay:  The  Story  of  the  Long  Struggle  fora  Waterway  Across  the  American 
Isthmus  (Stanford,  CA:  Stanford  University  Press,  1940). 

Engelman,  Rose  C.  ed.  A  Decade  of  Progress:  The  United  States  Army  Medical  Department,  1959-1969 
(Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1971). 

Evinger,  William  R.  Directory  of  U.S.  Military  Bases  Worldwide  (Oryx  Press:  n.p.,  1995). 

Fields,  J.B.,  Constructing  Quartermaster,  The  Panama  Canal.  Letter  to  Captain  E.M.  George,  Panama 
Canal  Department,  7  November  1922.  Record  Group  185,  Records  of  The  Panama  Canal, 

1914-1950.  Box  383,  Folder  3.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Fiftieth  Anniversary  Supplement.”  Panama  Canal  Review.  4  May  1954. 

“First  Barracks  At  Clayton  Fall  Prey  to  Operation  Demolition .”  Buccaneer.  1  November  1957. 

Fogle,  Major  Fred  M.,  Quartermaster  Corps,  Post  Quartermaster.  “Completion  Report  covering  the 
construction  of  Service  Club  and  Utilities  at  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone,”  8  April  1935.  Record  Group 
77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  67, 
Claremont  Terminal  to  Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

“Fort  Clayton,  (#1).”  n.p.,  n.d. 

“Fort  Clayton,  Building  List.”  Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  United  States 
Army  Garrison-Panama,  1999. 

Fort  Clayton  Construction  Book .  War  Department  Q.M.C.  Form  No.  117  (Old  No.  173  A).  Revised  27 
August  1932  (Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  United  States  Army  Garri¬ 
son-Panama). 

Geary,  Colonel  John  T.  “The  Coast  Artillery  in  Panama.”  Infantry  Journal.  Vol.  26  (April  1925),  395-398. 

Goodwin,  R.  Christopher  and  Associates,  Inc.  National  Historic  Context  for  Department  of  Defense 
Installations,  1790-1940  (Baltimore:  U.S.  Army  Corps  of  Engineers,  1995). 

Green,  Captain  F.A.,  33rd  Infantry,  Office  of  the  Quartermaster,  Panama  Canal  Department.  Letter  to  Chief 
Engineer,  The  Panama  Canal,  26  November  1921.  Record  Group  185,  Records  of  The  Panama  Canal, 
1914-1950.  Box  383,  Folder  3.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Harding,  Chester.  Governor,  The  Panama  Canal.  Letter  to  Commanding  General,  Panama  Canal  Depart¬ 
ment,  Quarry  Heights,  CZ,  16  September  1920.  Historical  Files,  DEH  Office,  Corozal,  Panama. 

Harding,  Chester.  Governor,  The  Panama  Canal.  Canal  Record,  12  February  1919, 293. 

Harp,  Susan.  “Panama  Canal  Defense  Vital  During  Second  World  War.”  Panama  Canal  Spillway.  2  July 
1993  and  5  November  1993. 


XXII 


Hasenauer,  Heike.  “The  Canal-A  Historic  Shortcut.”  Soldiers .  July  1999: 38-40. 

Haskin,  Frederic  J.  The  Panama  Canal  (Garden  City,  NY:  Doubleday,  Page  &  Company,  1913). 

Hawkins,  Colonel  Frank  B.  Letter  to  Commanding  General,  Panama  Canal  Department,  9  February 
1928.  Record  Group  407,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  General  Central  Files  1926-1939.  Box  2990,  Fort 
Clark  to  Fort  Clayton.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Heald,  Jean  Sadler.  Picturesque  Panama  (Chicago:  Curt  Teich  and  Company,  1928). 

“Historical  Study  On  Sabotage:  Transit  Guard,  Lock  Guard,  Utility  Guard”  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ: 

Panama  Canal  Department,  1945).  USARSO  History  Office  files.  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Holzer,  Richard,  Architect.  Interview  by  author,  Panama  City,  Panama,  11  November  1999. 

_ Electronic  communication  to  author,  22  November  1999. 

Howland,  Colonel  Charles  R.  “The  Infantry  in  the  Canal  Zone.”  Infantry  Journal,  Vol.  26  (April  1925), 
382-387. 

Hruby,  Colonel  Dale  E.,  General  Staff,  Acting  Director  of  Enlisted  Personnel,  U.S.  Army  Military  Person¬ 
nel  Center,  Department  of  the  Army.  Memorandum  to  Brigadier  General  Frederick  F.  Woerner,  Jr., 
Commander,  193d  Infantry  Brigade,  Fort  Clayton,  24  May  1984.  USARSO  History  Office  files. 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

“Installation  Design  Guide:  Fort  Clayton,  Panama”  (Jacksonville,  FL:  Harland  Bartholomew  and  Asso¬ 
ciates,  September  1990). 

“Jarman  Field,  Fort  Clayton,  Panama.”  n.p.,  n.d. 

Jenkin,  Thomas  P.,  Ober  D.  Purvis,  and  Joseph  W.  Crim.  A  History  of  Medical  Department  Activities  in 
the  Caribbean  Defense  Command  in  World  War  II  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Caribbean  Defense  Com¬ 
mand,  1946).  USARSO  History  Office  files.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College 
Park,  MD. 

Johnson,  Suzanne.  “An  American  Legacy  in  Panama:  A  Brief  History  of  the  Department  of  Defense 
Installations  and  Properties,  The  Former  Canal  Zone,  Republic  of  Panama”  (Corozal,  Panama: 
Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  United  States  Army  Garrison-Panama,  1995). 

Johnson,  Colonel  W.O.,  33rd  Infantry,  Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone.  Letter  to  the  Adjutant  General  of  the 
Army,  14  September  1922.  Record  Group  185,  Records  of  The  Panama  Canal,  1914-1950.  Box  383, 
Folder  3.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Joseph,  J.W.,  Mary  Beth  Reed,  and  Mark  Swanson.  “Peace  Has  Her  Victories  No  Less  Renowned  Than 
War:  A  History  of  Gorgas  Hospital”  (Mobile,  AL:  U.S.  Army  Corps  of  Engineers,  1996). 

Journal  of  the  United  States  Artillery,  Volume  III,  No.  1,  30  January  1920. 

Keller,  Ulrich.  The  Building  of  the  Panama  Canal  in  Historic  Photographs  (New  York:  Dover 
Publications,  Inc.,  1983). 

Kirkpatrick,  R.Z.,  “General  Grant  in  Panama,”  The  Military  Engineer,  vol  XXVI,  no.  146. 

Klasovsky,  Ivan.  Electronic  communication  to  author,  27-28  January,  9  February,  11  February,  22  Feb¬ 
ruary,  3  March  2000. 

Klein,  Major  General  John  A.,  U.S.  Army,  The  Adjutant  General,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  General.  Memo¬ 
randum  to  HQ,  United  States  Army  Caribbean,  Fort  Amador,  CZ,  20  August  1956.  USARSO  History 
Office  files.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD 

Knapp,  Herbert,  and  Mary  Knapp.  Red,  White,  and  Blue  Paradise:  The  American  Canal  Zone  in 
Panama  (San  Diego,  CA:  Harcourt  Brace  Jovanovich  Publishers,  1984). 

Land  Holdings  of  the  Armed  Forces  in  the  Canal  Zone  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Panama  Area  Joint 
Committee,  Headquarters  Caribbean  Command,  1  July  1956). 

Leon,  Stanley.  Interview  by  authors,  8  February  1995. 


xxiii 


Lockhart,  Captain  George  A.,  33d  Infantry,  Post  Exchange  Officer,  Fort  Clayton,  CZ.  Letter  to  The 
Panama  Canal,  9  July  1934.  Record  Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Com¬ 
pletion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  67,  Claremont  Terminal  to  Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1.  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Mack,  Gerstle.  The  Land  Divided:  A  History  of  the  Panama  Canal  and  Other  Isthmian  Canal  Projects 
(New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  1944). 

Marshall,  Logan.  The  Story  of  the  Panama  Canal  (New  York:  L.T.  Myers,  1913). 

McConnell,  Malcolm.  Just  Cause:  The  Real  Story  of  America ’ s  High-Tech  Invasion  of  Panama  (New 
York:  St.  Martin’s  Press,  1991). 

McCullough,  David.  The  Path  Between  the  Seas:  The  Creation  of  the  Panama  Canal ,  1870-1914  (New 
York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1977). 

McDonald,  Paul  Jr.,  ed.  Schooling  in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone  1904-1979  and  DODDS  Panama- 
1979- 1989  (Panama:  Phi  Delta  Kappa,  Panama  Canal  Area,  1990). 

McElroy,  Charles  S.  “Lady  Liberty:  Symbol  of  lasting  freedom  finds  a  new  home.”  Tropic  Times .  12  July 

1999. 

“Memorial.”  Southern  Command  News.  19  July  1968. 

Memorial  marker  hand  inscribed  by  author. 

Miller,  A.C.,  and  J.B.  Fields,  Department  of  Operation  and  Maintenance,  The  Panama  Canal.  Letter  to 
Engineer  of  Maintenance,  Panama  Canal  Department,  17  December  1921.  Record  Group  185, 
Records  of  The  Panama  Canal,  1914-1950.  Box  383,  Folder  3.  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Miller,  Hugh  Gordon.  The  Isthmian  Highway:  A  Review  of  the  Problems  of  the  Caribbean  (New  York: 
MacMillan  Co.,  1929). 

Moeller,  Stephen  P.  “Vigilant  and  Invincible.”  ADA  Magazine.  May-June  1995. 

Morris,  Charles.  Security  and  Defense  of  the  Panama  Canal:  1903-2000  (Balboa  Heights:  Panama 
Canal  Commission  Printing  Office,  n.d.). 

Morris,  T.C.,  Resident  Engineer,  The  Panama  Canal.  Letter  to  Department  Quartermaster,  Panama 
Canal  Department,  Ancon,  CZ,  6  February  1920.  Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate  of  Engineering  and 
Housing,  United  States  Army  Garrison-Panama. 

Office  of  the  Quartermaster  Completion  Reports  accompanying  document,  30  June  1928.  Record 
Group  77,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  Construction  Completion  Reports  1917-1943.  Box  67, 
Claremont  Terminal  to  Fort  Clayton,  CZ,  Vol.  1.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration, 
College  Park,  MD. 

“Old  Building  Lists:  Canal  Zone  Army  Posts"  (Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Hous¬ 
ing,  United  States  Army  Garrison-Panama,  n.d.). 

Operation  Transit  in  the  Panama  Canal  Department  (Canal  Zone:  Department  Engineer  Reproduction 
Plant,  n.d.). 

Overkott,  Robert  L.  “Memories  of  Fort  Clayton,  Panama  Canal  Zone.”  Unpublished  document,  March 

2000. 

Page,  Jim.  Electronic  communication  to  Raul  Irigoyen,  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing, 
USARSO,  19  November  1999. 

Panama  American.  16  November  1933. 

“Panama!  Operation  Just  Cause.”  Airman.  (February  1990),  28-31. 

Panama  Canal  Department.  “Construction.”  II  Vols  (Quarry  Heights,  CZ:  Panama  Canal  Department, 

1945).  USARSO  History  Office  files.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 


XXIV 


Panama  Canal  Department  Historical  Section.  History  of  the  Panama  Canal  Department,  n.p .,  1949 . 

Vol.  1,  Introduction  and  Historical  Background  1903-1939.  Vol.  2,  Preparation  for  War  1939-1941. 
Vol.  3,  The  War  Period  1941-1945.  Vol  4,  The  Reconversion  Period  1945-1947. 

Panama  Canal  Department  Historical  Section.  Medical  Corps.  USARSO  History  Office  files.  National 
Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Pedrotty,  Michael  A.,  Julie  L.  Webster,  Gordon  L.  Cohen,  and  Aaron  R.  Chmiel.  “Historical  and  Archi¬ 
tectural  Overview  of  Military  Aircraft  Hangars”  (U.S.  Army  ERDC/CERL  Technical  Report  TR 
98/105,  Langley  Air  Force  Base,  VA:  Headquarters,  U.S.  Air  Force  Air  Combat  Command,  Septem¬ 
ber  1999). 

Peters,  Lieutenant  Colonel  Martin  A.,  U.S.  Army  (Ret).  Letter  to  author,  10  December  1999. 

_ unpublished  memoirs,  1998, 152. 

Plans  and  Property  Branch,  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing.  “Building  Information  Schedule, 
as  of  31  March  1982”  (Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  United  States 
Army  Garrison-Panama,  1982). 

Public  Affairs  Office,  193rd  Infantry  Brigade,  Panama.  “Impact  of  the  Panama  Canal  Treaty  on  the  United 
States  Military  in  the  Panama  Canal  Area”  (Fort  Clayton,  Republic  of  Panama:  USARSO,  n.d.). 

Public  Affairs  Office,  U.S.  Army  South.  “Public  Information  Paper”  (Fort  Clayton,  Republic  of  Panama: 
USARSO,  1989). 

“Quarters  Schedule  and  Type  of  Buildings”  (Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Hous¬ 
ing,  United  States  Army  Garrison-Panama,  1979). 

“Rapid  Ecological  Assessment  of  the  Lands  in  Panama  Managed  by  the  United  States  Department  of 
Defense”  (n.p.  National  Association  for  the  Conservation  of  Nature  (ANCON),  31  December  1994). 

Real  Property  Record  Cards.  DA  Form  2877, 1  Nov  64  (AR  733-27)  and  WD  AGO  Form,  1  Nov  1945 
(Corozal,  Panama:  Directorate  of  Engineering  and  Housing,  United  States  Army  Garrison- 
Panama). 

Regn,  Colonel  Elmer  M.,  ed.  “Fort  Clayton,  Canal  Zone:  Master  Plan  Analysis  of  Existing  Facilities” 
(Fort  Clayton,  CZ:  USARSO  Command  Review  Board,  1972). 

“Remember  Pearl  Harbor?”  Panama  Canal  Review.  7  December  1951. 

Reynold,  Captain  J.H.  “Marines  in  Panama:  1856-1976."  Marine  Corps  Gazette.  October  1976:  31-33. 

Ryan,  Paul.  The  Panama  Controversy:  U.S.  Diplomacy  and  Defense  Interests  (Stanford,  CA:  Hoover 
Institution  Press,  1977). 

Sauer,  James  H.  Interview  by  author,  Owensboro,  Kentucky,  5  February  2000. 

Scanlon,  Tom.  Army  Times  Guide  to  Army  Posts  (Harrisburg,  Pennsylvania:  The  Stackpole  Company, 
1966). 

Selton,  Lieutenant  Colonel,  H.D.,  33d  Infantry,  Commanding,  Headquarters,  Fort  Clayton,  CZ.  Commu¬ 
nication  to  the  Adjutant  General,  23  May  1933.  Record  Group  407,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  General 
Central  Files  1926-1939.  Box  2990,  Fort  Clark  to  Fort  Clayton.  National  Archives  and  Records 
Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Sibert,  Major  General  Franklin,  “Retired  Major  General  Recalls  Former  Days  in  Canal  Zone,”  Southern 
Comfort  News,  5  December  1969, 10. 

Small,  Allan  R.  Interview  by  author,  Fort  Clayton,  Panama,  21  February  1995. 

“Southern  Command  Network  Comes  to  End.”  Tropic  Times.  2  July  1999. 

Speller,  Jon  P.  The  Panama  Canal:  Heart  of  America ’s  Security  (New  York:  Robert  Speller  &  Sons,  Pub¬ 
lishers,  Inc.,  1972). 

Sullivan,  Charles  J.  Army  Posts  &  Towns :  The  Baedeker  of  the  Army  (Burlington:  Free  Press  Printing 
Company,  1926). 


XXV 


Temme,  Virge  Jenkins.  Tor  Want  of  a  Home  ...’A  Historic  Context  for  Wherry  and  Capehart  Military 
Family  Housing  (Aberdeen  Proving  Ground,  MD:  United  States  Army  Environmental  Center,  1998). 

“Ten  Years  Ago  in  April.”  Panama  Canal  Review.  1  May  1953. 

“Ten  Years  Ago  in  January.”  Panama  Canal  Review.  1  February  1952. 

“Ten  Years  Ago  in  July.”  Panama  Canal  Review.  1  August  1952. 

“Ten  Years  Ago  in  March.”  Panama  Canal  Review.  4  April  1951. 

“The  Army  and  Navy:  The  military  and  naval  activities  on  the  Canal  Zone  are  important  elements  of 
the  Canal  enterprise.”  Panama  Canal:  Twenty-Fifth  Anniversary,  1914-1939  (Mount  Hope,  CZ:  The 
Panama  Canal  Press,  1939). 

The  Panama  Canal.  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  the  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended  June 
30,  1915  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1915). 

The  Panama  Canal.  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended 
June  30,  1917  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1917). 

The  Panama  Canal.  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended 
June  30,  1918  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1918). 

The  Panama  Canal.  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended 
June  30,  1919  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1919). 

The  Panama  Canal.  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended 
June  30,  1920  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1920). 

The  Panama  Canal.  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended 
June  30,  1921  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1921). 

The  Panama  Canal.  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended 
June  30,  1922  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1922). 

The  Panama  Canal.  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  of  The  Panama  Canal  for  the  Fiscal  Year  Ended 
June  30,  1936  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1936). 

Tierney,  Chaplain  Dudley  R.  “Recreation  in  Tropical  Panama.”  Infantry  Journal.  Vol.  26  (April  1925), 
399-403. 

Tippett,  Robert  H.  “My  Comments  and  Recollections  on  Fort  Clayton.”  Unpublished  manuscript,  7  Feb¬ 
ruary  2000. 

U.S.  Adjutant  General’s  Office.  Acquisition  of  Land  in  the  Panama  Canal  Zone:  History  of  World  War  II. 
n.p.,  n.d. 

U.S.  Army  Medical  Department,  the  Historical  Unit.  Medical  Department,  United  States  Army  in  World 
War  II:  Preventive  Medicine  in  World  War  II.  Robert  S.  Anderson  and  Ebbe  Curtis  Hoff,  eds.  Vol.  9, 
Special  Fields  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1969). 

“Useful  Canal  Zone  Information.”  Infantry  Journal.  Vol.  26  (April  1925),  441-444. 

U.S.  Navy,  Bureau  of  Yards  and  Docks.  Building  the  Navy's  Bases  in  World  War  II:  History  of  the  Bureau 
of  Yards  and  Docks  and  the  Civil  Engineer  Corps,  1940-1946.  2  vois  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1947). 

U.S.  Senate.  Background  Documents  Relating  to  the  Panama  Canal,  Committee  on  Foreign  Relations 
(Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1977). 

U.S.  Senate.  A  Chronology  of  Events  Relating  to  the  Panama  Canal:  Prepared  for  the  Committee  on  For¬ 
eign  Relations  (Washington,  DC:  GPO,  1977). 

U.S.  Senate.  Defense,  Maintenance  and  Operation  of  the  Panama  Canal,  Including  Administration  and 
Government  of  the  Canal  Zone— Hearings  Before  the  Committee  on  Armed  Services  (Washington, 
DC:  GPO,  1978). 

Voss,  T.S.  “The  Army  Air  Service.”  Infantry  Journal.  Vol.  26  (April  1925),  417-420. 


XXVI 


“War  Plans  and  Defense  Measures.”  n.p.,  circa  1948.  USARSO  History  Office  files.  National  Archives 
and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Warner,  Stuart  G..  R.,  Archivist,  USARSO,  “Speech  for  1997  Army  Birthday  Ball”  authored  for  presenta¬ 
tion  by  BG  Philip  R.  Kensinger,  Jr.,  Commanding  General,  USARSO,  14  June  1997. 

Webster,  Julie  L.  et  al.  Historical  and  Architectural  Documentation  Reports  for  Fort  Riley,  Kansas,  Vol  I 
(Champaign:  U.S.  Army  Construction  Engineering  Research  Laboratory,  1993),  18. 

Wells,  George  M,  Resident  Engineer,  The  Panama  Canal.  Letter  to  Governor,  The  Panama  Canal,  27 
January  1916.  Record  Group  185,  Records  of  The  Panama  Canal,  1914-1950.  Box  383,  Folder  2. 
National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  College  Park,  MD. 

Westover,  Brigadier  General  O.,  Air  Corps,  Assistant  Chief  of  the  Air  Corp.  Letter  to  Chief  of  the  Air 
Corps,  Washington,  DC,  4  April  1933.  Record  Group  407,  Office  of  the  Adjutant  General  Central 
Files  1926-1939.  Box  2990,  Fort  Clark  to  Fort  Clayton.  National  Archives  and  Records  Administra¬ 
tion,  College  Park,  MD. 

White,  James  C.  “Ft.  Clayton-A  History."  Southern  Command  News .  3  April  1970. 

- “USARSO’s  Anniversary.”  Southern  Command  News.  2  July  1970. 

Wilson,  Richard  Guy.  “Imperial  American  Identity  at  the  Panama  Canal.”  Modulus.  (1980/81):  22-29. 

Wilson,  Robert  S.  Letter  to  author,  8  December  1999. 

Worthington,  Wayne.  Electronic  communication  to  author,  10  January  2000. 


XXVII 


